

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Etymology, definition, and usage

Aspects

International law and racial discrimination
Ideology
Ethnicity and ethnic conflicts

History

Scientific racism

Theories about the origins of racism
Psychological causes
State-sponsored racism
Anti-racism

See also
References
Further reading
External links
Racism

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page extended-confirmed-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Not to be confused with Discrimination based on nationality.
Part of a series on
Discrimination

Forms
Attributes
AgeCasteClassDialectDisabilityEconomicGeneticHair textureHeightLanguageLooksMental disorderNationality or citizenshipRace / Ethnicity ReverseSkin colorScientific racismRankSex ReverseSexual orientationSpeciesSizeViewpoint
Social
Religious
Race or ethnicity
Manifestations
Policies
Countermeasures
Related topics
vte
Racism is the belief that groups of humans possess different behavioral traits corresponding to inherited attributes and can be divided based on the superiority of one race or ethnicity over another.[1][2][3] It may also mean prejudice, discrimination, or antagonism directed against other people because they are of a different ethnic background.[2] Modern variants of racism are often based in social perceptions of biological differences between peoples. These views can take the form of social actions, practices or beliefs, or political systems in which different races are ranked as inherently superior or inferior to each other, based on presumed shared inheritable traits, abilities, or qualities.[2][3] There have been attempts to legitimize racist beliefs through scientific means, such as scientific racism, which have been overwhelmingly shown to be unfounded. In terms of political systems (e.g. apartheid) that support the expression of prejudice or aversion in discriminatory practices or laws, racist ideology may include associated social aspects such as nativism, xenophobia, otherness, segregation, hierarchical ranking, and supremacism.

While the concepts of race and ethnicity are considered to be separate in contemporary social science, the two terms have a long history of equivalence in popular usage and older social science literature. "Ethnicity" is often used in a sense close to one traditionally attributed to "race", the division of human groups based on qualities assumed to be essential or innate to the group (e.g. shared ancestry or shared behavior). Racism and racial discrimination are often used to describe discrimination on an ethnic or cultural basis, independent of whether these differences are described as racial. According to the United Nations's Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, there is no distinction between the terms "racial" and "ethnic" discrimination. It further concludes that superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust, and dangerous. The convention also declared that there is no justification for racial discrimination, anywhere, in theory or in practice.[4]

Racism is frequently described as a relatively modern concept, evolving during the European age of imperialism, transformed by capitalism,[5] and the Atlantic slave trade,[1][6] of which it was a major driving force.[7] It was also a major force behind racial segregation in the United States in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and of apartheid in South Africa; 19th and 20th-century racism in Western culture is particularly well documented and constitutes a reference point in studies and discourses about racism.[8] Racism has played a role in genocides such as the Holocaust, the Armenian genocide, the Rwandan genocide, and the Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia, as well as colonial projects including the European colonization of the Americas, Africa, Asia, and the population transfer in the Soviet Union including deportations of indigenous minorities.[9] Indigenous peoples have been—and are—often subject to racist attitudes.

Etymology, definition, and usage
Race
History
Historical concepts
Biblical terminology for race
Society
Color terminology
Race relations
Racialization
Racism (scientific racism)
Racial equality
Racial politics
Sociology of race
Race and...
Crime (United Kingdom, United States)
Genetics
Health (United States)
Horror films
Intelligence (history)
Neuroscience
Sexuality
Society
Sports
Video games
By location
Race and ethnicity in censuses
Brazil
Colombia
Latin America
United States
Related topics
Colonialism
Nakedness and colonialism
Ethnic group
Human skin color
Social stratification
White supremacy
Index
Category
vte

An early use of the word racism by Richard Henry Pratt in 1902: "Association of races and classes is necessary to destroy racism and classism."
In the 19th century, many scientists subscribed to the belief that the human population can be divided into races. The term racism is a noun describing the state of being racist, i.e., subscribing to the belief that the human population can or should be classified into races with differential abilities and dispositions, which in turn may motivate a political ideology in which rights and privileges are differentially distributed based on racial categories. The term "racist" may be an adjective or a noun, the latter describing a person who holds those beliefs.[10] The origin of the root word "race" is not clear. Linguists generally agree that it came to the English language from Middle French, but there is no such agreement on how it generally came into Latin-based languages. A recent proposal is that it derives from the Arabic ra's, which means "head, beginning, origin" or the Hebrew rosh, which has a similar meaning.[11] Early race theorists generally held the view that some races were inferior to others and they consequently believed that the differential treatment of races was fully justified.[12][13][14] These early theories guided pseudo-scientific research assumptions; the collective endeavors to adequately define and form hypotheses about racial differences are generally termed scientific racism, though this term is a misnomer, due to the lack of any actual science backing the claims.

Most biologists, anthropologists, and sociologists reject a taxonomy of races in favor of more specific and/or empirically verifiable criteria, such as geography, ethnicity, or a history of endogamy.[15] Human genome research indicates that race is not a meaningful genetic classification of humans.[16][17][18][19]

An entry in the Oxford English Dictionary (2008) defines racialism as "[a]n earlier term than racism, but now largely superseded by it", and cites the term "racialism" in a 1902 quote.[20] The revised Oxford English Dictionary cites the shorter term "racism" in a quote from the year 1903.[21] It was defined by the Oxford English Dictionary (2nd edition 1989) as "[t]he theory that distinctive human characteristics and abilities are determined by race"; the same dictionary termed racism a synonym of racialism: "belief in the superiority of a particular race". By the end of World War II, racism had acquired the same supremacist connotations formerly associated with racialism: racism by then implied racial discrimination, racial supremacism, and a harmful intent. The term "race hatred" had also been used by sociologist Frederick Hertz in the late 1920s.

As its history indicates, the popular use of the word racism is relatively recent. The word came into widespread usage in the Western world in the 1930s, when it was used to describe the social and political ideology of Nazism, which treated "race" as a naturally given political unit.[22] It is commonly agreed that racism existed before the coinage of the word, but there is not a wide agreement on a single definition of what racism is and what it is not.[12] Today, some scholars of racism prefer to use the concept in the plural racisms, in order to emphasize its many different forms that do not easily fall under a single definition. They also argue that different forms of racism have characterized different historical periods and geographical areas.[23] Garner (2009: p. 11) summarizes different existing definitions of racism and identifies three common elements contained in those definitions of racism. First, a historical, hierarchical power relationship between groups; second, a set of ideas (an ideology) about racial differences; and, third, discriminatory actions (practices).[12]

Legal
Though many countries around the globe have passed laws related to race and discrimination, the first significant international human rights instrument developed by the United Nations (UN) was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR),[24] which was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. The UDHR recognizes that if people are to be treated with dignity, they require economic rights, social rights including education, and the rights to cultural and political participation and civil liberty. It further states that everyone is entitled to these rights "without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status".

The UN does not define "racism"; however, it does define "racial discrimination". According to the 1965 UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,[25]

The term "racial discrimination" shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.

In their 1978 United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice (Article 1), the UN states, "All human beings belong to a single species and are descended from a common stock. They are born equal in dignity and rights and all form an integral part of humanity."[26]

The UN definition of racial discrimination does not make any distinction between discrimination based on ethnicity and race, in part because the distinction between the two has been a matter of debate among academics, including anthropologists.[27] Similarly, in British law, the phrase racial group means "any group of people who are defined by reference to their race, colour, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin".[28]

In Norway, the word "race" has been removed from national laws concerning discrimination because the use of the phrase is considered problematic and unethical.[29][30] The Norwegian Anti-Discrimination Act bans discrimination based on ethnicity, national origin, descent, and skin color.[31]

Social and behavioral sciences
Main article: Sociology of race and ethnic relations
Sociologists, in general, recognize "race" as a social construct. This means that, although the concepts of race and racism are based on observable biological characteristics, any conclusions drawn about race on the basis of those observations are heavily influenced by cultural ideologies. Racism, as an ideology, exists in a society at both the individual and institutional level.

While much of the research and work on racism during the last half-century or so has concentrated on "white racism" in the Western world, historical accounts of race-based social practices can be found across the globe.[32] Thus, racism can be broadly defined to encompass individual and group prejudices and acts of discrimination that result in material and cultural advantages conferred on a majority or a dominant social group.[33] So-called "white racism" focuses on societies in which white populations are the majority or the dominant social group. In studies of these majority white societies, the aggregate of material and cultural advantages is usually termed "white privilege".

Race and race relations are prominent areas of study in sociology and economics. Much of the sociological literature focuses on white racism. Some of the earliest sociological works on racism were written by sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois, the first African American to earn a doctoral degree from Harvard University. Du Bois wrote, "[t]he problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line."[34] Wellman (1993) defines racism as "culturally sanctioned beliefs, which, regardless of intentions involved, defend the advantages whites have because of the subordinated position of racial minorities".[35] In both sociology and economics, the outcomes of racist actions are often measured by the inequality in income, wealth, net worth, and access to other cultural resources (such as education), between racial groups.[36]

In sociology and social psychology, racial identity and the acquisition of that identity, is often used as a variable in racism studies. Racial ideologies and racial identity affect individuals' perception of race and discrimination. Cazenave and Maddern (1999) define racism as "a highly organized system of 'race'-based group privilege that operates at every level of society and is held together by a sophisticated ideology of color/'race' supremacy. Racial centrality (the extent to which a culture recognizes individuals' racial identity) appears to affect the degree of discrimination African-American young adults perceive whereas racial ideology may buffer the detrimental emotional effects of that discrimination."[37] Sellers and Shelton (2003) found that a relationship between racial discrimination and emotional distress was moderated by racial ideology and social beliefs.[38]

Some sociologists also argue that, particularly in the West, where racism is often negatively sanctioned in society, racism has changed from being a blatant to a more covert expression of racial prejudice. The "newer" (more hidden and less easily detectable) forms of racism—which can be considered embedded in social processes and structures—are more difficult to explore and challenge. It has been suggested that, while in many countries overt or explicit racism has become increasingly taboo, even among those who display egalitarian explicit attitudes, an implicit or aversive racism is still maintained subconsciously.[39]

This process has been studied extensively in social psychology as implicit associations and implicit attitudes, a component of implicit cognition. Implicit attitudes are evaluations that occur without conscious awareness towards an attitude object or the self. These evaluations are generally either favorable or unfavorable. They come about from various influences in the individual experience.[40] Implicit attitudes are not consciously identified (or they are inaccurately identified) traces of past experience that mediate favorable or unfavorable feelings, thoughts, or actions towards social objects.[39] These feelings, thoughts, or actions have an influence on behavior of which the individual may not be aware.[41]

Therefore, subconscious racism can influence our visual processing and how our minds work when we are subliminally exposed to faces of different colors. In thinking about crime, for example, social psychologist Jennifer L. Eberhardt (2004) of Stanford University holds that, "blackness is so associated with crime you're ready to pick out these crime objects."[42] Such exposures influence our minds and they can cause subconscious racism in our behavior towards other people or even towards objects. Thus, racist thoughts and actions can arise from stereotypes and fears of which we are not aware.[43] For example, scientists and activists have warned that the use of the stereotype "Nigerian Prince" for referring to advance-fee scammers is racist, i.e. "reducing Nigeria to a nation of scammers and fraudulent princes, as some people still do online, is a stereotype that needs to be called out".[44]

Humanities
Language, linguistics, and discourse are active areas of study in the humanities, along with literature and the arts. Discourse analysis seeks to reveal the meaning of race and the actions of racists through careful study of the ways in which these factors of human society are described and discussed in various written and oral works. For example, Van Dijk (1992) examines the different ways in which descriptions of racism and racist actions are depicted by the perpetrators of such actions as well as by their victims.[45] He notes that when descriptions of actions have negative implications for the majority, and especially for white elites, they are often seen as controversial and such controversial interpretations are typically marked with quotation marks or they are greeted with expressions of distance or doubt. The previously cited book, The Souls of Black Folk by W.E.B. Du Bois, represents early African-American literature that describes the author's experiences with racism when he was traveling in the South as an African American.

Much American fictional literature has focused on issues of racism and the black "racial experience" in the US, including works written by whites, such as Uncle Tom's Cabin, To Kill a Mockingbird, and Imitation of Life, or even the non-fiction work Black Like Me. These books, and others like them, feed into what has been called the "white savior narrative in film", in which the heroes and heroines are white even though the story is about things that happen to black characters. Textual analysis of such writings can contrast sharply with black authors' descriptions of African Americans and their experiences in US society. African-American writers have sometimes been portrayed in African-American studies as retreating from racial issues when they write about "whiteness", while others identify this as an African-American literary tradition called "the literature of white estrangement", part of a multi-pronged effort to challenge and dismantle white supremacy in the US.[46]

Popular usage
According to dictionary definitions, racism is prejudice and discrimination based on race.[47][48]

Racism can also be said to describe a condition in society in which a dominant racial group benefits from the oppression of others, whether that group wants such benefits or not.[49] Foucauldian scholar Ladelle McWhorter, in her 2009 book, Racism and Sexual Oppression in Anglo-America: A Genealogy, posits modern racism similarly, focusing on the notion of a dominant group, usually whites, vying for racial purity and progress, rather than an overt or obvious ideology focused on the oppression of nonwhites.[50]

In popular usage, as in some academic usage, little distinction is made between "racism" and "ethnocentrism". Often, the two are listed together as "racial and ethnic" in describing some action or outcome that is associated with prejudice within a majority or dominant group in society. Furthermore, the meaning of the term racism is often conflated with the terms prejudice, bigotry, and discrimination. Racism is a complex concept that can involve each of those; but it cannot be equated with, nor is it synonymous, with these other terms.[citation needed]

Some academics use a new stipulative definition of racism, seeing racism not only in terms of individual prejudice, but also seeing it in terms of a power structure that protects the interests of the dominant culture and actively discriminates against ethnic minorities. From this newly defined perspective, racism means "Prejudice plus power".[51]

Aspects
Globe icon.
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (May 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
The ideology underlying racism can manifest in many aspects of social life. Such aspects are described in this section, although the list is not exhaustive.

Aversive racism
Main article: Aversive racism
Aversive racism is a form of implicit racism, in which a person's unconscious negative evaluations of racial or ethnic minorities are realized by a persistent avoidance of interaction with other racial and ethnic groups. As opposed to traditional, overt racism, which is characterized by overt hatred for and explicit discrimination against racial/ethnic minorities, aversive racism is characterized by more complex, ambivalent expressions and attitudes.[52] Aversive racism is similar in implications to the concept of symbolic or modern racism (described below), which is also a form of implicit, unconscious, or covert attitude which results in unconscious forms of discrimination.

The term was coined by Joel Kovel to describe the subtle racial behaviors of any ethnic or racial group who rationalize their aversion to a particular group by appeal to rules or stereotypes.[52] People who behave in an aversively racial way may profess egalitarian beliefs, and will often deny their racially motivated behavior; nevertheless they change their behavior when dealing with a member of another race or ethnic group than the one they belong to. The motivation for the change is thought to be implicit or subconscious. Experiments have provided empirical support for the existence of aversive racism. Aversive racism has been shown to have potentially serious implications for decision making in employment, in legal decisions and in helping behavior.[53][54]

Color blindness
Main article: Color blindness (race)
In relation to racism, color blindness is the disregard of racial characteristics in social interaction, for example in the rejection of affirmative action, as a way to address the results of past patterns of discrimination. Critics of this attitude argue that by refusing to attend to racial disparities, racial color blindness in fact unconsciously perpetuates the patterns that produce racial inequality.[55]

Eduardo Bonilla-Silva argues that color blind racism arises from an "abstract liberalism, biologization of culture, naturalization of racial matters, and minimization of racism".[56] Color blind practices are "subtle, institutional, and apparently nonracial"[57] because race is explicitly ignored in decision-making. If race is disregarded in predominantly white populations, for example, whiteness becomes the normative standard, whereas people of color are othered, and the racism these individuals experience may be minimized or erased.[58][59] At an individual level, people with "color blind prejudice" reject racist ideology, but also reject systemic policies intended to fix institutional racism.[59]

Cultural
See also: Cultural racism and Xenophobia
Cultural racism manifests as societal beliefs and customs that promote the assumption that the products of a given culture, including the language and traditions of that culture, are superior to those of other cultures. It shares a great deal with xenophobia, which is often characterized by fear of, or aggression toward, members of an outgroup by members of an ingroup.[60] In that sense it is also similar to communalism as used in South Asia.[61]

Cultural racism exists when there is a widespread acceptance of stereotypes concerning diverse ethnic or population groups.[62] Whereas racism can be characterised by the belief that one race is inherently superior to another, cultural racism can be characterised by the belief that one culture is inherently superior to another.[63]

Economic
Further information: Criticism of capitalism § Racism, Racial pay gap in the United States, and Racial wealth gap in the United States
Historical economic or social disparity is alleged to be a form of discrimination caused by past racism and historical reasons, affecting the present generation through deficits in the formal education and kinds of preparation in previous generations, and through primarily unconscious racist attitudes and actions on members of the general population. Some view that capitalism generally transformed racism depending on local circumstances, but racism is not necessary for capitalism.[64] Economic discrimination may lead to choices that perpetuate racism. For example, color photographic film was tuned for white skin[65] as are automatic soap dispensers[66] and facial recognition systems.[67]

Institutional
Further information: Institutional racism, Structural racism, State racism, Racial profiling, and Racism by country

African-American university student Vivian Malone entering the University of Alabama in the U.S. to register for classes as one of the first African-American students to attend the institution. Until 1963, the university was racially segregated and African-American students were not allowed to attend.
Institutional racism (also known as structural racism, state racism or systemic racism) is racial discrimination by governments, corporations, religions, or educational institutions or other large organizations with the power to influence the lives of many individuals. Stokely Carmichael is credited for coining the phrase institutional racism in the late 1960s. He defined the term as "the collective failure of an organization to provide an appropriate and professional service to people because of their colour, culture or ethnic origin".[68]

Maulana Karenga argued that racism constituted the destruction of culture, language, religion, and human possibility and that the effects of racism were "the morally monstrous destruction of human possibility involved redefining African humanity to the world, poisoning past, present and future relations with others who only know us through this stereotyping and thus damaging the truly human relations among peoples".[69]

Institutional racism refers to racism in terms of a power structure that protects the interests of the dominant culture and actively discriminates against ethnic minorities, not only in terms of individual prejudice or formal discrimination.[70][71]

Othering
Main article: Othering
Othering is the term used by some to describe a system of discrimination whereby the characteristics of a group are used to distinguish them as separate from the norm.[72]

Othering plays a fundamental role in the history and continuation of racism. To objectify a culture as something different, exotic or underdeveloped is to generalize that it is not like 'normal' society. Europe's colonial attitude towards the Orientals exemplifies this as it was thought that the East was the opposite of the West; feminine where the West was masculine, weak where the West was strong and traditional where the West was progressive.[73] By making these generalizations and othering the East, Europe was simultaneously defining herself as the norm, further entrenching the gap.[74]

Much of the process of othering relies on imagined difference, or the expectation of difference. Spatial difference can be enough to conclude that "we" are "here" and the "others" are over "there".[73] Imagined differences serve to categorize people into groups and assign them characteristics that suit the imaginer's expectations.[75]

Racial discrimination
Main article: Racial discrimination
Racial discrimination refers to discrimination against someone on the basis of their race.

Racial segregation
Main article: Racial segregation
External videos
video icon James A. White Sr.: The little problem I had renting a house, TED Talks, 14:20, 20 February 2015
Racial segregation is the separation of humans into socially-constructed racial groups in daily life. It may apply to activities such as eating in a restaurant, drinking from a water fountain, using a bathroom, attending school, going to the movies, or in the rental or purchase of a home.[76] Segregation is generally outlawed, but may exist through social norms, even when there is no strong individual preference for it, as suggested by Thomas Schelling's models of segregation and subsequent work.

Supremacism
Main article: Supremacism

In 1899 Uncle Sam (a personification of the United States) balances his new possessions which are depicted as savage children. The figures are Puerto Rico, Hawaii, Cuba, Philippines and "Ladrones" (the Mariana Islands).
Centuries of European colonialism in the Americas, Africa and Asia were often justified by white supremacist attitudes.[77] During the early 20th century, the phrase "The White Man's Burden" was widely used to justify an imperialist policy as a noble enterprise.[78][79] A justification for the policy of conquest and subjugation of Native Americans emanated from the stereotyped perceptions of the indigenous people as "merciless Indian savages", as they are described in the United States Declaration of Independence.[80] Sam Wolfson of The Guardian writes that "the declaration's passage has often been cited as an encapsulation of the dehumanizing attitude toward indigenous Americans that the US was founded on."[81] In an 1890 article about colonial expansion onto Native American land, author L. Frank Baum wrote: "The Whites, by law of conquest, by justice of civilization, are masters of the American continent, and the best safety of the frontier settlements will be secured by the total annihilation of the few remaining Indians."[82] In his Notes on the State of Virginia, published in 1785, Thomas Jefferson wrote: "blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time or circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endowments of both body and mind."[83] Attitudes of black supremacy, Arab supremacy, and East Asian supremacy also exist.

Symbolic/modern
Main article: Symbolic racism

A rally against school integration in Little Rock, Arkansas, 1959
Some scholars argue that in the US, earlier violent and aggressive forms of racism have evolved into a more subtle form of prejudice in the late 20th century. This new form of racism is sometimes referred to as "modern racism" and it is characterized by outwardly acting unprejudiced while inwardly maintaining prejudiced attitudes, displaying subtle prejudiced behaviors such as actions informed by attributing qualities to others based on racial stereotypes, and evaluating the same behavior differently based on the race of the person being evaluated.[84] This view is based on studies of prejudice and discriminatory behavior, where some people will act ambivalently towards black people, with positive reactions in certain, more public contexts, but more negative views and expressions in more private contexts. This ambivalence may also be visible for example in hiring decisions where job candidates that are otherwise positively evaluated may be unconsciously disfavored by employers in the final decision because of their race.[85][86][87] Some scholars consider modern racism to be characterized by an explicit rejection of stereotypes, combined with resistance to changing structures of discrimination for reasons that are ostensibly non-racial, an ideology that considers opportunity at a purely individual basis denying the relevance of race in determining individual opportunities and the exhibition of indirect forms of micro-aggression toward and/or avoidance of people of other races.[88]

Subconscious biases
Main article: Implicit bias § Racial bias
Recent research has shown that individuals who consciously claim to reject racism may still exhibit race-based subconscious biases in their decision-making processes. While such "subconscious racial biases" do not fully fit the definition of racism, their impact can be similar, though typically less pronounced, not being explicit, conscious or deliberate.[89]

International law and racial discrimination
In 1919, a proposal to include a racial equality provision in the Covenant of the League of Nations was supported by a majority, but not adopted in the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. In 1943, Japan and its allies declared work for the abolition of racial discrimination to be their aim at the Greater East Asia Conference.[90] Article 1 of the 1945 UN Charter includes "promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race" as UN purpose.

In 1950, UNESCO suggested in The Race Question—a statement signed by 21 scholars such as Ashley Montagu, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Gunnar Myrdal, Julian Huxley, etc.—to "drop the term race altogether and instead speak of ethnic groups". The statement condemned scientific racism theories that had played a role in the Holocaust. It aimed both at debunking scientific racist theories, by popularizing modern knowledge concerning "the race question", and morally condemned racism as contrary to the philosophy of the Enlightenment and its assumption of equal rights for all. Along with Myrdal's An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy (1944), The Race Question influenced the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court desegregation decision in Brown v. Board of Education.[91] Also, in 1950, the European Convention on Human Rights was adopted, which was widely used on racial discrimination issues.[92]

The United Nations use the definition of racial discrimination laid out in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, adopted in 1966:[93]

... any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life. (Part 1 of Article 1 of the U.N. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination)

In 2001, the European Union explicitly banned racism, along with many other forms of social discrimination, in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the legal effect of which, if any, would necessarily be limited to Institutions of the European Union: "Article 21 of the charter prohibits discrimination on any ground such as race, color, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, disability, age or sexual orientation and also discrimination on the grounds of nationality."[94]

Ideology

A pro–Hiester Clymer racist political campaign poster from the 1866 Pennsylvania gubernatorial election
Racism existed during the 19th century as scientific racism, which attempted to provide a racial classification of humanity.[95] In 1775 Johann Blumenbach divided the world's population into five groups according to skin color (Caucasians, Mongols, etc.), positing the view that the non-Caucasians had arisen through a process of degeneration. Another early view in scientific racism was the polygenist view, which held that the different races had been separately created. Polygenist Christoph Meiners (1747 – May 1810) for example, split mankind into two divisions which he labeled the "beautiful White race" and the "ugly Black race". In Meiners' book, The Outline of History of Mankind, he claimed that a main characteristic of race is either beauty or ugliness. He viewed only the white race as beautiful. He considered ugly races to be inferior, immoral and animal-like.

Anders Retzius (1796–1860) demonstrated that neither Europeans nor others are one "pure race", but of mixed origins. While discredited, derivations of Blumenbach's taxonomy are still widely used for the classification of the population in the United States. Hans Peder Steensby, while strongly emphasizing that all humans today are of mixed origins, in 1907 claimed that the origins of human differences must be traced extraordinarily far back in time, and conjectured that the "purest race" today would be the Australian Aboriginals.[96]


A sign on a racially segregated beach during Apartheid in South Africa, stating that the area is for the "sole use of members of the white race group"
Scientific racism fell strongly out of favor in the early 20th century, but the origins of fundamental human and societal differences are still researched within academia, in fields such as human genetics including paleogenetics, social anthropology, comparative politics, history of religions, history of ideas, prehistory, history, ethics, and psychiatry. There is widespread rejection of any methodology based on anything similar to Blumenbach's races. It is more unclear to which extent and when ethnic and national stereotypes are accepted.

Although after World War II and the Holocaust, racist ideologies were discredited on ethical, political and scientific grounds, racism and racial discrimination have remained widespread around the world.

Du Bois observed that it is not so much "race" that we think about, but culture: "... a common history, common laws and religion, similar habits of thought and a conscious striving together for certain ideals of life".[97] Late 19th century nationalists were the first to embrace contemporary discourses on "race", ethnicity, and "survival of the fittest" to shape new nationalist doctrines. Ultimately, race came to represent not only the most important traits of the human body, but was also regarded as decisively shaping the character and personality of the nation.[98] According to this view, culture is the physical manifestation created by ethnic groupings, as such fully determined by racial characteristics. Culture and race became considered intertwined and dependent upon each other, sometimes even to the extent of including nationality or language to the set of definition. Pureness of race tended to be related to rather superficial characteristics that were easily addressed and advertised, such as blondness. Racial qualities tended to be related to nationality and language rather than the actual geographic distribution of racial characteristics. In the case of Nordicism, the denomination "Germanic" was equivalent to superiority of race.

Bolstered by some nationalist and ethnocentric values and achievements of choice, this concept of racial superiority evolved to distinguish from other cultures that were considered inferior or impure. This emphasis on culture corresponds to the modern mainstream definition of racism: "[r]acism does not originate from the existence of 'races'. It creates them through a process of social division into categories: anybody can be racialised, independently of their somatic, cultural, religious differences."[99]

This definition explicitly ignores the biological concept of race, which is still subject to scientific debate. In the words of David C. Rowe, "[a] racial concept, although sometimes in the guise of another name, will remain in use in biology and in other fields because scientists, as well as lay persons, are fascinated by human diversity, some of which is captured by race."[100]

Racial prejudice became subject to international legislation. For instance, the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 1963, addresses racial prejudice explicitly next to discrimination for reasons of race, colour or ethnic origin (Article I).[101]

Ethnicity and ethnic conflicts
Further information: Ethnicity

A mass grave being dug for frozen bodies from the 1890 Wounded Knee Massacre, in which the U.S. Army killed 150 Lakota people, marking the end of the American Indian Wars
Debates over the origins of racism often suffer from a lack of clarity over the term. Many use the term "racism" to refer to more general phenomena, such as xenophobia and ethnocentrism, although scholars attempt to clearly distinguish those phenomena from racism as an ideology or from scientific racism, which has little to do with ordinary xenophobia. Others conflate recent forms of racism with earlier forms of ethnic and national conflict. In most cases, ethno-national conflict seems to owe itself to conflict over land and strategic resources. In some cases, ethnicity and nationalism were harnessed in order to rally combatants in wars between great religious empires (for example, the Muslim Turks and the Catholic Austro-Hungarians).

Notions of race and racism have often played central roles in ethnic conflicts. Throughout history, when an adversary is identified as "other" based on notions of race or ethnicity (in particular when "other" is interpreted to mean "inferior"), the means employed by the self-presumed "superior" party to appropriate territory, human chattel, or material wealth often have been more ruthless, more brutal, and less constrained by moral or ethical considerations. According to historian Daniel Richter, Pontiac's Rebellion saw the emergence on both sides of the conflict of "the novel idea that all Native people were 'Indians,' that all Euro-Americans were 'Whites,' and that all on one side must unite to destroy the other".[102] Basil Davidson states in his documentary, Africa: Different but Equal, that racism, in fact, only just recently surfaced as late as the 19th century, due to the need for a justification for slavery in the Americas.

Historically, racism was a major driving force behind the Transatlantic slave trade.[103] It was also a major force behind racial segregation, especially in the United States in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and South Africa under apartheid; 19th and 20th century racism in the Western world is particularly well documented and constitutes a reference point in studies and discourses about racism.[8] Racism has played a role in genocides such as the Armenian genocide, and the Holocaust, and colonial projects like the European colonization of the Americas, Africa, and Asia. Indigenous peoples have been—and are—often subject to racist attitudes. Practices and ideologies of racism are condemned by the United Nations in the Declaration of Human Rights.[104]

Ethnic and racial nationalism
Further information: Ethnic nationalism, Racial nationalism, and Romantic nationalism

A 1917 anti-conscription propaganda leaflet imploring voters to "keep Australia white". A horde of Asians bearing a dragon flag is shown to the north.
After the Napoleonic Wars, Europe was confronted with the new "nationalities question", leading to reconfigurations of the European map, on which the frontiers between the states had been delineated during the 1648 Peace of Westphalia. Nationalism had made its first appearance with the invention of the levée en masse by the French Revolutionaries, thus inventing mass conscription in order to be able to defend the newly founded Republic against the Ancien Régime order represented by the European monarchies. This led to the French Revolutionary Wars (1792–1802) and then to the conquests of Napoleon, and to the subsequent European-wide debates on the concepts and realities of nations, and in particular of nation-states. The Westphalia Treaty had divided Europe into various empires and kingdoms (such as the Ottoman Empire, the Holy Roman Empire, the Swedish Empire, the Kingdom of France, etc.), and for centuries wars were waged between princes (Kabinettskriege in German).

Modern nation-states appeared in the wake of the French Revolution, with the formation of patriotic sentiments for the first time in Spain during the Peninsula War (1808–1813, known in Spain as the Independence War). Despite the restoration of the previous order with the 1815 Congress of Vienna, the "nationalities question" became the main problem of Europe during the Industrial Era, leading in particular to the 1848 Revolutions, the Italian unification completed during the 1871 Franco-Prussian War, which itself culminated in the proclamation of the German Empire in the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles, thus achieving the German unification.

Meanwhile, the Ottoman Empire, the "sick man of Europe", was confronted with endless nationalist movements, which, along with the dissolving of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, would lead to the creation, after World War I, of the various nation-states of the Balkans, with "national minorities" in their borders.[105]

Ethnic nationalism, which advocated the belief in a hereditary membership of the nation, made its appearance in the historical context surrounding the creation of the modern nation-states.

One of its main influences was the Romantic nationalist movement at the turn of the 19th century, represented by figures such as Johann Herder (1744–1803), Johan Fichte (1762–1814) in the Addresses to the German Nation (1808), Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831), or also, in France, Jules Michelet (1798–1874). It was opposed to liberal nationalism, represented by authors such as Ernest Renan (1823–1892), who conceived of the nation as a community, which, instead of being based on the Volk ethnic group and on a specific, common language, was founded on the subjective will to live together ("the nation is a daily plebiscite", 1882) or also John Stuart Mill (1806–1873).[106] Ethnic nationalism blended with scientific racist discourses, as well as with "continental imperialist" (Hannah Arendt, 1951[107]) discourses, for example in the pan-Germanism discourses, which postulated the racial superiority of the German Volk (people/folk). The Pan-German League (Alldeutscher Verband), created in 1891, promoted German imperialism and "racial hygiene", and was opposed to intermarriage with Jews. Another popular current, the Völkisch movement, was also an important proponent of the German ethnic nationalist discourse, and it combined Pan-Germanism with modern racial antisemitism. Members of the Völkisch movement, in particular the Thule Society, would participate in the founding of the German Workers' Party (DAP) in Munich in 1918, the predecessor of the Nazi Party. Pan-Germanism played a decisive role in the interwar period of the 1920s–1930s.[107]

These currents began to associate the idea of the nation with the biological concept of a "master race" (often the "Aryan race" or the "Nordic race") issued from the scientific racist discourse. They conflated nationalities with ethnic groups, called "races", in a radical distinction from previous racial discourses that posited the existence of a "race struggle" inside the nation and the state itself. Furthermore, they believed that political boundaries should mirror these alleged racial and ethnic groups, thus justifying ethnic cleansing, in order to achieve "racial purity" and also to achieve ethnic homogeneity in the nation-state.

Such racist discourses, combined with nationalism, were not, however, limited to pan-Germanism. In France, the transition from Republican liberal nationalism, to ethnic nationalism, which made nationalism a characteristic of far-right movements in France, took place during the Dreyfus Affair at the end of the 19th century. During several years, a nationwide crisis affected French society, concerning the alleged treason of Alfred Dreyfus, a French Jewish military officer. The country polarized itself into two opposite camps, one represented by Émile Zola, who wrote J'Accuse…! in defense of Alfred Dreyfus, and the other represented by the nationalist poet, Maurice Barrès (1862–1923), one of the founders of the ethnic nationalist discourse in France.[108] At the same time, Charles Maurras (1868–1952), founder of the monarchist Action française movement, theorized the "anti-France", composed of the "four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons and foreigners" (his actual word for the latter being the pejorative métèques). Indeed, to him the first three were all "internal foreigners", who threatened the ethnic unity of the French people.

History
"History of racism" redirects here. For racism concept in history, see historical race concepts.
Ethnocentrism and proto-racism

The Book of Genesis's biblical curse on Canaan, which was often misinterpreted as a curse on his father Ham, was used to justify slavery in 19th century America.[109]
Aristotle
Bernard Lewis has cited the Greek philosopher Aristotle who, in his discussion of slavery, stated that while Greeks are free by nature, "barbarians" (non-Greeks) are slaves by nature, in that it is in their nature to be more willing to submit to a despotic government.[110] Though Aristotle does not specify any particular races, he argues that people from nations outside Greece are more prone to the burden of slavery than those from Greece.[111] While Aristotle makes remarks about the most natural slaves being those with strong bodies and slave souls (unfit for rule, unintelligent) which would seem to imply a physical basis for discrimination, he also explicitly states that the right kind of souls and bodies do not always go together, implying that the greatest determinate for inferiority and natural slaves versus natural masters is the soul, not the body.[112] The modern version of racism based on the idea of hereditary inferiority had not yet been developed, and Aristotle never explicitly stated whether he believed the supposed natural inferiority of Barbarians was caused by environment and climate (like many of his contemporaries) or by birth.[113]

Historian Dante A. Puzzo, in his discussion of Aristotle, racism, and the ancient world writes that:[114]

Racism rests on two basic assumptions: that a correlation exists between physical characteristics and moral qualities; that mankind is divisible into superior and inferior stocks. Racism, thus defined, is a modern conception, for prior to the XVIth century there was virtually nothing in the life and thought of the West that can be described as racist. To prevent misunderstanding a clear distinction must be made between racism and ethnocentrism ... The Ancient Hebrews, in referring to all who were not Hebrews as Gentiles, were indulging in ethnocentrism, not in racism. ... So it was with the Hellenes who denominated all non-Hellenes—whether the wild Scythians or the Egyptians whom they acknowledged as their mentors in the arts of civilization—Barbarians, the term denoting that which was strange or foreign.

Early antisemitism
Some scholars suggest that anti-Jewish policies under the Hellenistic empires and the Roman Empire constitute examples of ancient racism.[115][116][117] Other scholars have criticized this view as based on an ahistorical conception of race,[118] and argued that such policies were aimed at repressing a religious group resistant to imperialism and conformity rather than a racialized entity.[119][120]

Medieval Arab writers
See also: Medieval Arab attitudes to Black people
Bernard Lewis has also cited historians and geographers of the Middle East and North Africa region,[121] including Al-Muqaddasi, Al-Jahiz, Al-Masudi, Abu Rayhan Biruni, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, and Ibn Qutaybah.[121] Though the Qur'an expresses no racial prejudice, Lewis argues that ethnocentric prejudice later developed among Arabs, for a variety of reasons:[121] their extensive conquests and slave trade; the influence of Aristotelian ideas regarding slavery, which some Muslim philosophers directed towards Zanj (Bantu[122]) and Turkic peoples;[110] and the influence of Judeo-Christian ideas regarding divisions among humankind.[123] By the eighth century, anti-black prejudice among Arabs resulted in discrimination. A number of medieval Arabic authors argued against this prejudice, urging respect for all black people and especially Ethiopians.[124] By the 14th century, a significant number of slaves came from sub-Saharan Africa; Lewis argues that this led to the likes of Egyptian historian Al-Abshibi (1388–1446) writing that "[i]t is said that when the [black] slave is sated, he fornicates, when he is hungry, he steals."[125] According to Lewis, the 14th-century Tunisian scholar Ibn Khaldun also wrote:[121][126]

...beyond [known peoples of black West Africa] to the south there is no civilization in the proper sense. There are only humans who are closer to dumb animals than to rational beings. They live in thickets and caves, and eat herbs and unprepared grain. They frequently eat each other. They cannot be considered human beings. Therefore, the Negro nations are, as a rule, submissive to slavery, because (Negroes) have little that is (essentially) human and possess attributes that are quite similar to those of dumb animals, as we have stated.

According to Wesleyan University professor Abdelmajid Hannoum, French Orientalists projected racist and colonialist views of the 19th century into their translations of medieval Arabic writings, including those of Ibn Khaldun. This resulted in the translated texts racializing Arabs and Berber people, when no such distinction was made in the originals.[127] James E. Lindsay argues that the concept of an Arab identity itself did not exist until modern times,[128] though others like Robert Hoyland have argued that a common sense of Arab identity already existed by the 9th century.[129]

Limpieza de sangre
Further information: Limpieza de sangre
With the Umayyad Caliphate's conquest of Hispania, Muslim Arabs and Berbers overthrew the previous Visigothic rulers and created Al-Andalus,[130] which contributed to the Golden age of Jewish culture, and lasted for six centuries.[131] It was followed by the centuries-long Reconquista,[132] during which Christian Iberian kingdoms contested Al-Andalus and progressively conquered the divided Muslim kingdoms, culminating in the fall of the Nasrid kingdom of Granada in 1492 and the rise of Ferdinand V and Isabella I as Catholic monarchs of Spain. The legacy Catholic Spaniards then formulated the limpieza de sangre ("cleanliness of blood") doctrine. It was during this time in history that the Western concept of aristocratic "blue blood" emerged in a racialized, religious and feudal context,[133] so as to stem the upward social mobility of the converted New Christians. Robert Lacey explains:[134]

It was the Spaniards who gave the world the notion that an aristocrat's blood is not red but blue. The Spanish nobility started taking shape around the ninth century in classic military fashion, occupying land as warriors on horseback. They were to continue the process for more than five hundred years, clawing back sections of the peninsula from its Moorish occupiers, and a nobleman demonstrated his pedigree by holding up his sword arm to display the filigree of blue-blooded veins beneath his pale skin—proof that his birth had not been contaminated by the dark-skinned enemy. Sangre azul, blue blood, was thus a euphemism for being a white man—Spain's own particular reminder that the refined footsteps of the aristocracy through history carry the rather less refined spoor of racism.

Following the expulsion of the Arabic Moors and most of the Sephardic Jews from the Iberian peninsula, the remaining Jews and Muslims were forced to convert to Roman Catholicism, becoming "New Christians", who were sometimes discriminated against by the "Old Christians" in some cities (including Toledo), despite condemnations by the Church and the State, which both welcomed the new flock.[133] The Inquisition was carried out by members of the Dominican Order in order to weed out the converts who still practiced Judaism and Islam in secret. The system and ideology of the limpieza de sangre ostracized false Christian converts from society in order to protect it against treason.[135] The remnants of such legislation persevered into the 19th century in military contexts.[136]

In Portugal, the legal distinction between New and Old Christian was only ended through a legal decree issued by the Marquis of Pombal in 1772, almost three centuries after the implementation of the racist discrimination. The limpieza de sangre legislation was common also during the colonization of the Americas, where it led to the racial and feudal separation of peoples and social strata in the colonies. It was however often ignored in practice, as the new colonies needed skilled people.[137]


A 16th-century illustration by Flemish Protestant Theodor de Bry for Las Casas's Brevisima relación de la destrucción de las Indias, depicting Spanish atrocities during the conquest of Cuba
At the end of the Renaissance, the Valladolid debate (1550–1551), concerning the treatment of the natives of the "New World" pitted the Dominican friar and Bishop of Chiapas, Bartolomé de Las Casas, to another Dominican and Humanist philosopher, Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda. The latter argued that the Indians practiced human sacrifice of innocents, cannibalism, and other such "crimes against nature"; they were unacceptable and should be suppressed by any means possible including war,[138] thus reducing them to slavery or serfdom was in accordance with Catholic theology and natural law. To the contrary, Bartolomé de Las Casas argued that the Amerindians were free men in the natural order and deserved the same treatment as others, according to Catholic theology. It was one of the many controversies concerning racism, slavery, religion, and European morality that would arise in the following centuries and which resulted in the legislation protecting the natives.[139] The marriage between Luisa de Abrego, a free black domestic servant from Seville and Miguel Rodríguez, a white segovian conquistador in 1565 in St. Augustine (Spanish Florida), is the first known and recorded Christian marriage anywhere in the continental United States.[140]

In the Spanish colonies, Spaniards developed a complex caste system based on race, which was used for social control, and which also determined a person's importance in society.[141] While many Latin American countries have long since rendered the system officially illegal through legislation, usually at the time of their independence, prejudice based on degrees of perceived racial distance from European ancestry combined with one's socioeconomic status remain, an echo of the colonial caste system.[142]

Racism as a modern phenomenon
Racism is frequently described as a modern phenomenon. In the view of the French philosopher and historian Michel Foucault, the first formulation of racism emerged in the Early Modern period as the "discourse of race struggle", and a historical and political discourse, which Foucault opposed to the philosophical and juridical discourse of sovereignty.[143]

This European discourse, which first appeared in Great Britain, was then carried on in France by such people as Boulainvilliers (1658–1722), Nicolas Fréret (1688–1749), and then, during the 1789 French Revolution, Sieyès, and afterwards, Augustin Thierry and Cournot. Boulainvilliers, who created the matrix of such racist discourse in France, conceived of the "race" as being something closer to the sense of a "nation", that is, in his time, the "race" meant the "people".

He conceived of France as being divided between various nations—the unified nation-state is an anachronism here—which themselves formed different "races". Boulainvilliers opposed the absolute monarchy, which tried to bypass the aristocracy by establishing a direct relationship to the Third Estate. Thus, he developed the theory that the French aristocrats were the descendants of foreign invaders, whom he called the "Franks", while according to him, the Third Estate constituted the autochthonous, vanquished Gallo-Romans, who were dominated by the Frankish aristocracy as a consequence of the right of conquest. Early modern racism was opposed to nationalism and the nation-state: the Comte de Montlosier, in exile during the French Revolution, who borrowed Boulainvilliers' discourse on the "Nordic race" as being the French aristocracy that invaded the plebeian "Gauls", thus showed his contempt for the Third Estate, calling it "this new people born of slaves ... mixture of all races and of all times".

19th century

Advertisement for Pears' Soap Caption reads, "Matchless for the complexion..." Illustration of 'before and after' use of soap by black child in the bath; soap washes off his dark complexion.
While 19th-century racism became closely intertwined with nationalism,[144] leading to the ethnic nationalist discourse that identified the "race" with the "folk", leading to such movements as pan-Germanism, pan-Turkism, pan-Arabism, and pan-Slavism, medieval racism precisely divided the nation into various non-biological "races", which were thought to be the consequence of historical conquests and social conflicts. Michel Foucault traced the genealogy of modern racism to this medieval "historical and political discourse of race struggle". According to him, it divided itself in the 19th century according to two rival lines: on one hand, it was incorporated by racists, biologists and eugenicists, who gave it the modern sense of "race", and they also transformed this popular discourse into a "state racism" (e.g., Nazism). On the other hand, Marxism also seized this discourse founded on the assumption of a political struggle that provided the real engine of history and continued to act underneath the apparent peace. Thus, Marxists transformed the essentialist notion of "race" into the historical notion of "class struggle", defined by socially structured positions: capitalist or proletarian. In The Will to Knowledge (1976), Foucault analyzed another opponent of the "race struggle" discourse: Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis, which opposed the concept of "blood heredity", prevalent in the 19th century racist discourse.

Authors such as Hannah Arendt, in her 1951 book The Origins of Totalitarianism, have said that the racist ideology (popular racism) which developed at the end of the 19th century helped legitimize the imperialist conquests of foreign territories and the atrocities that sometimes accompanied them (such as the Herero and Namaqua Genocide of 1904–1907 or the Armenian genocide of 1915–1917). Rudyard Kipling's poem, The White Man's Burden (1899), is one of the more famous illustrations of the belief in the inherent superiority of the European culture over the rest of the world, though it is also thought to be a satirical appraisal of such imperialism. Racist ideology thus helped legitimize the conquest and incorporation of foreign territories into an empire, which were regarded as a humanitarian obligation partially as a result of these racist beliefs.


A late-19th-century illustration from Ireland from One or Two Neglected Points of View by H. Strickland Constable shows an alleged similarity between "Irish Iberian" and "Negro" features in contrast to the "higher" "Anglo-Teutonic".
However, during the 19th century, Western European colonial powers were involved in the suppression of the Arab slave trade in Africa,[145] as well as in the suppression of the slave trade in West Africa.[146] Some Europeans during the time period objected to injustices that occurred in some colonies and lobbied on behalf of aboriginal peoples. Thus, when the Hottentot Venus was displayed in England in the beginning of the 19th century, the African Association publicly opposed itself to the exhibition. The same year that Kipling published his poem, Joseph Conrad published Heart of Darkness (1899), a clear criticism of the Congo Free State, which was owned by Leopold II of Belgium.

Examples of racial theories used include the creation of the Hamitic theory during the European exploration of Africa. The term Hamite was applied to different populations within North Africa, mainly comprising Ethiopians, Eritreans, Somalis, Berbers, and the ancient Egyptians. Hamites were regarded as Caucasoid peoples who probably originated in either Arabia or Asia on the basis of their cultural, physical and linguistic similarities with the peoples of those areas.[147][148][149] Europeans considered Hamites to be more civilized than Sub-Saharan Africans, and more akin to themselves and Semitic peoples.[150] In the first two-thirds of the 20th century, the Hamitic race was, in fact, considered one of the branches of the Caucasian race, along with the Indo-Europeans, Semites, and the Mediterraneans.

However, the Hamitic peoples themselves were often deemed to have failed as rulers, which was usually ascribed to interbreeding with Negroes. In the mid-20th century, the German scholar Carl Meinhof (1857–1944) claimed that the Bantu race was formed by a merger of Hamitic and Negro races. The Hottentots (Nama or Khoi) were formed by the merger of Hamitic and Bushmen (San) races—both being termed nowadays as Khoisan peoples.


One in a series of posters attacking Radical Republicans on the issue of black suffrage, issued during the Pennsylvania gubernatorial election of 1866
In the United States in the early 19th century, the American Colonization Society was established as the primary vehicle for proposals to return black Americans to greater freedom and equality in Africa.[151] The colonization effort resulted from a mixture of motives with its founder Henry Clay stating that "unconquerable prejudice resulting from their color, they never could amalgamate with the free whites of this country. It was desirable, therefore, as it respected them, and the residue of the population of the country, to drain them off".[152] Racism spread throughout the New World in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Whitecapping, which started in Indiana in the late 19th century, soon spread throughout all of North America, causing many African laborers to flee from the land they worked on. In the US, during the 1860s, racist posters were used during election campaigns. In one of these racist posters (see above), a black man is depicted lounging idly in the foreground as one white man ploughs his field and another chops wood. Accompanying labels are: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread", and "The white man must work to keep his children and pay his taxes." The black man wonders, "Whar is de use for me to work as long as dey make dese appropriations." Above in a cloud is an image of the "Freedman's Bureau! Negro Estimate of Freedom!" The bureau is pictured as a large domed building resembling the U.S. Capitol and is inscribed "Freedom and No Work". Its columns and walls are labeled, "Candy", "Rum, Gin, Whiskey", "Sugar Plums", "Indolence", "White Women", "Apathy", "White Sugar", "Idleness", and so on.

On 5 June 1873, Sir Francis Galton, distinguished English explorer and cousin of Charles Darwin, wrote in a letter to The Times:

My proposal is to make the encouragement of Chinese settlements of Africa a part of our national policy, in the belief that the Chinese immigrants would not only maintain their position, but that they would multiply and their descendants supplant the inferior Negro race ... I should expect that the African seaboard, now sparsely occupied by lazy, palavering savages, might in a few years be tenanted by industrious, order-loving Chinese, living either as a semidetached dependency of China, or else in perfect freedom under their own law.[153]

20th century
Further information: Racial policy of Nazi Germany, Holocaust, Forced settlements in the Soviet Union, Apartheid, Racial segregation in the United States, and Rwandan genocide

Austrian Nazis and local residents watch as Jews are forced to scrub the pavement, Vienna, March 1938

Eichmann's list of the Jewish population in Europe, drafted for the Wannsee Conference, held to ensure the cooperation of various levels of the Nazi government in the Final Solution
The Nazi party, which seized power in the 1933 German elections and maintained a dictatorship over much of Europe until the End of World War II on the European continent, deemed the Germans to be part of an Aryan "master race" (Herrenvolk), who therefore had the right to expand their territory and enslave or kill members of other races deemed inferior.[154]

The racial ideology conceived by the Nazis graded humans on a scale of pure Aryan to non-Aryan, with the latter viewed as subhuman. At the top of the scale of pure Aryans were Germans and other Germanic peoples including the Dutch, Scandinavians, and the English as well as other peoples such as some northern Italians and the French, who were said to have a suitable admixture of Germanic blood.[155] Nazi policies labeled Romani people, people of color, and Slavs (mainly Poles, Serbs, Russians, Belarusians, Ukrainians and Czechs) as inferior non-Aryan subhumans.[156][157] Jews were at the bottom of the hierarchy, considered inhuman and thus unworthy of life.[157][158][159][160][161][162][163] In accordance with Nazi racial ideology, approximately six million Jews were killed in the Holocaust. 2.5 million ethnic Poles, 0.5 million ethnic Serbs and 0.2–0.5 million Romani were killed by the regime and its collaborators.[164]

The Nazis considered most Slavs to be non-Aryan Untermenschen. The Nazi Party's chief racial theorist, Alfred Rosenberg, adopted the term from Klansman Lothrop Stoddard's 1922 book The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-man.[165] In the secret plan Generalplan Ost ("Master Plan East") the Nazis resolved to expel, enslave, or exterminate most Slavic people to provide "living space" for Germans,[166] but Nazi policy towards Slavs changed during World War II due to manpower shortages which necessitated limited Slavic participation in the Waffen-SS.[167] Significant war crimes were committed against Slavs, particularly Poles, and Soviet POWs had a far higher mortality rate than their American and British counterparts due to deliberate neglect and mistreatment. Between June 1941 and January 1942, the Nazis killed an estimated 2.8 million Red Army POWs, whom they viewed as "subhuman".[168]

In the years 1943–1945, around 120,000 Polish people, mostly women and children, became the victims of ethnicity-based massacres by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, which was then operating in the territory of occupied Poland.[169] In addition to Poles who represented the vast majority of the murdered people, the victims also included Jews, Armenians, Russians, and Ukrainians who were married to Poles or attempted to help them.[170]

During the intensification of ties with Nazi Germany in the 1930s, Ante Pavelić and the Ustaše and their idea of the Croatian nation became increasingly race-oriented.[171][172][173] The Ustaše view of national and racial identity, as well as the theory of Serbs as an inferior race, was influenced by Croatian nationalists and intellectuals from the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century.[171][174][175][176] Serbs were primary targets of racial laws and murders in the puppet Independent State of Croatia (NDH); Jews and Roma were also targeted.[177] The Ustaše introduced laws to strip Serbs of their citizenship, livelihoods, and possessions.[178] During the genocide in the NDH, Serbs suffered among the highest casualty rates in Europe during the World War II, and the NDH was one of the most lethal regimes in the 20th century.[179][180][173]

German praise for America's institutional racism was continuous throughout the early 1930s, and Nazi lawyers were advocates of the use of American models.[181] Race based U.S. citizenship laws and anti-miscegenation laws (no race mixing) directly inspired the Nazi's two principal Nuremberg racial laws—the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law.[181] Hitler's 1925 memoir Mein Kampf was full of admiration for America's treatment of "coloreds".[182] Nazi expansion eastward was accompanied with invocation of America's colonial expansion westward, with the accompanying actions toward the Native Americans.[183] In 1928, Hitler praised Americans for having "gunned down the millions of Redskins to a few hundred thousand, and now keeps the modest remnant under observation in a cage."[184] On Nazi Germany's expansion eastward, in 1941 Hitler stated, "Our Mississippi [the line beyond which Thomas Jefferson wanted all Indians expelled] must be the Volga."[183]


A drinking fountain from the mid-20th century labelled "Colored" with an African-American man drinking

A sign posted above a bar that reads "No beer sold to Indians [Native Americans]". Birney, Montana, 1941.
White supremacy was dominant in the U.S. from its founding up to the civil rights movement.[185] On the U.S. immigration laws prior to 1965, sociologist Stephen Klineberg cited the law as clearly declaring "that Northern Europeans are a superior subspecies of the white race."[186] While anti-Asian racism was embedded in U.S. politics and culture in the early 20th century, Indians were also racialized for their anticolonialism, with U.S. officials, casting them as a "Hindu" menace, pushing for Western imperial expansion abroad.[187] The Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only, and in the 1923 case, United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind, the Supreme Court ruled that high caste Hindus were not "white persons" and were therefore racially ineligible for naturalized citizenship.[188][189] It was after the Luce–Celler Act of 1946 that a quota of 100 Indians per year could immigrate to the U.S. and become citizens.[190] The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 dramatically opened entry to the U.S. to immigrants other than traditional Northern European and Germanic groups, and as a result would significantly alter the demographic mix in the U.S.[186]

Serious race riots in Durban between Indians and Zulus erupted in 1949.[191] Ne Win's rise to power in Burma in 1962 and his relentless persecution of "resident aliens" led to an exodus of some 300,000 Burmese Indians.[192] They migrated to escape racial discrimination and wholesale nationalisation of private enterprises a few years later, in 1964.[193] The Zanzibar Revolution of 12 January 1964, put an end to the local Arab dynasty.[194] Thousands of Arabs and Indians in Zanzibar were massacred in riots, and thousands more were detained or fled the island.[195] In August 1972, Ugandan President Idi Amin started the expropriation of properties owned by Asians and Europeans.[196][197] In the same year, Amin ethnically cleansed Uganda's Asians, giving them 90 days to leave the country.[198] Shortly after World War II, the South African National Party took control of the government in South Africa. Between 1948 and 1994, the apartheid regime took place. This regime based its ideology on the racial separation of whites and non-whites, including the unequal rights of non-whites. Several protests and violence occurred during the struggle against apartheid, the most famous of these include the Sharpeville Massacre in 1960, the Soweto uprising in 1976, the Church Street bombing of 1983, and the Cape Town peace march of 1989.[199]

Contemporary

On 12 September 2011, Julius Malema, the youth leader of South Africa's ruling ANC, was found guilty of hate speech for singing "Shoot the Boer[broken anchor]" at a number of public events.[200]
During the Congo Civil War (1998–2003), Pygmy people were hunted down like game animals and eaten. Both sides in the war regarded them as "subhuman" and some say their flesh can confer magical powers. UN human rights activists reported in 2003 that rebels had carried out acts of cannibalism. Sinafasi Makelo, a representative of the Mbuti pygmies, has asked the UN Security Council to recognise cannibalism as both a crime against humanity and an act of genocide.[201] A report released by the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination condemns Botswana's treatment of the 'Bushmen' as racist.[202] In 2008, the tribunal of the 15-nation Southern African Development Community (SADC) accused Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe of having a racist attitude towards white people.[203][204]

The mass demonstrations and riots against African students in Nanjing, China, lasted from December 1988 to January 1989.[205] In November 2009, British newspaper The Guardian reported that Lou Jing, of mixed Chinese and African parentage, had emerged as the most famous talent show contestant in China and has become the subject of intense debate because of her skin color.[206] Her attention in the media opened serious debates about racism in China and racial prejudice.[207]

Some 70,000 black African Mauritanians were expelled from Mauritania in the late 1980s.[208] In the Sudan, black African captives in the civil war were often enslaved, and female prisoners were often sexually abused.[209] The Darfur conflict has been described by some as a racial matter.[210] In October 2006, Niger announced that it would deport the approximately 150,000[211] Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger to Chad.[212] While the government collected Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing Government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages.[213]


The burnt out remains of Govinda's Indian Restaurant in Fiji, May 2000
The Jakarta riots of May 1998 targeted many Chinese Indonesians.[214] The anti-Chinese legislation was in the Indonesian constitution until 1998. Resentment against Chinese workers has led to violent confrontations in Africa[215][216][217] and Oceania.[218][219] Anti-Chinese rioting, involving tens of thousands of people,[220] broke out in Papua New Guinea in May 2009.[221] Indo-Fijians suffered violent attacks after the Fiji coup in 2000.[222] Non-indigenous citizens of Fiji are subject to discrimination.[223][224] Racial divisions also exist in Guyana,[225] Malaysia,[226] Trinidad and Tobago,[227] Madagascar,[228] and South Africa.[229] In Malaysia such racist state policies are codified on many levels,[230][231] see Bumiputera.

Peter Bouckaert, the Human Rights Watch's emergencies director, said in an interview that "racist hatred" is the chief motivation behind the violence against Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar.[232]

One form of racism in the United States was enforced racial segregation, which existed until the 1960s, when it was outlawed in the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It has been argued that this separation of races continues to exist de facto today in different forms, such as lack of access to loans and resources or discrimination by police and other government officials.[233][234]

The 2016 Pew Research poll found that Italians, in particular, hold strong anti-Romani views, with 82% of Italians expressing negative opinions about Romani. In Greece, there are 67%, in Hungary, 64%, in France, 61%, in Spain, 49%, in Poland, 47%, in the UK, 45%, in Sweden, 42%, in Germany, 40%, and in the Netherlands, 37%, that have an unfavourable view of Roma.[235] A survey conducted by Harvard University found the Czech Republic, Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine had the strongest racial bias against black people in Europe, while Serbia, Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina had the weakest racial bias, followed by Croatia and Ireland.[236][237]

A 2023 University of Cambridge survey which featured the largest sample of Black people in Britain found that 88% had reported racial discrimination at work, 79% believed the police unfairly targeted black people with stop and search powers and 80% definitely or somewhat agreed that the biggest barrier to academic attainment for young Black students was racial discrimination in education.[238]

Scientific racism
Main article: Scientific racism
Further information: Unilineal evolution

Drawings from Josiah C. Nott and George Gliddon's Indigenous races of the earth (1857), which suggested black people ranked between white people and chimpanzees in terms of intelligence
The modern biological definition of race developed in the 19th century with scientific racist theories. The term scientific racism refers to the use of science to justify and support racist beliefs, which goes back to the early 18th century, though it gained most of its influence in the mid-19th century, during the New Imperialism period. Also known as academic racism, such theories first needed to overcome the Church's resistance to positivist accounts of history and its support of monogenism, the concept that all human beings were originated from the same ancestors, in accordance with creationist accounts of history.

These racist theories put forth on scientific hypothesis were combined with unilineal theories of social progress, which postulated the superiority of the European civilization over the rest of the world. Furthermore, they frequently made use of the idea of "survival of the fittest", a term coined by Herbert Spencer in 1864, associated with ideas of competition, which were named social Darwinism in the 1940s. Charles Darwin himself opposed the idea of rigid racial differences in The Descent of Man (1871), in which he argued that humans were all of one species, sharing common descent. He recognised racial differences as varieties of humanity, and emphasised the close similarities between people of all races in mental faculties, tastes, dispositions and habits, while still contrasting the culture of the "lowest savages" with European civilization.[239][240]

At the end of the 19th century, proponents of scientific racism intertwined themselves with eugenics discourses of "degeneration of the race" and "blood heredity".[citation needed] Henceforth, scientific racist discourses could be defined as the combination of polygenism, unilinealism, social Darwinism, and eugenism. They found their scientific legitimacy on physical anthropology, anthropometry, craniometry, phrenology, physiognomy, and others now discredited disciplines in order to formulate racist prejudices.

Before being disqualified in the 20th century by the American school of cultural anthropology (Franz Boas, etc.), the British school of social anthropology (Bronisław Malinowski, Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, etc.), the French school of ethnology (Claude Lévi-Strauss, etc.), as well as the discovery of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, such sciences, in particular anthropometry, were used to deduce behaviours and psychological characteristics from outward, physical appearances.

The neo-Darwinian synthesis, first developed in the 1930s, eventually led to a gene-centered view of evolution in the 1960s. According to the Human Genome Project, the most complete mapping of human DNA to date indicates that there is no clear genetic basis to racial groups. While some genes are more common in certain populations, there are no genes that exist in all members of one population and no members of any other.[241]

Heredity and eugenics
Further information: Eugenics
The first theory of eugenics was developed in 1869 by Francis Galton (1822–1911), who used the then-popular concept of degeneration. He applied statistics to study human differences and the alleged "inheritance of intelligence", foreshadowing future uses of "intelligence testing" by the anthropometry school. Such theories were vividly described by the writer Émile Zola (1840–1902), who started publishing in 1871, a twenty-novel cycle, Les Rougon-Macquart, where he linked heredity to behavior. Thus, Zola described the high-born Rougons as those involved in politics (Son Excellence Eugène Rougon) and medicine (Le Docteur Pascal) and the low-born Macquarts as those fatally falling into alcoholism (L'Assommoir), prostitution (Nana), and homicide (La Bête humaine).

During the rise of Nazism in Germany, some scientists in Western nations worked to debunk the regime's racial theories. A few argued against racist ideologies and discrimination, even if they believed in the alleged existence of biological races. However, in the fields of anthropology and biology, these were minority positions until the mid-20th century.[242] According to the 1950 UNESCO statement, The Race Question, an international project to debunk racist theories had been attempted in the mid-1930s. However, this project had been abandoned. Thus, in 1950, UNESCO declared that it had resumed:

...up again, after a lapse of fifteen years, a project that the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation has wished to carry through but that it had to abandon in deference to the appeasement policy of the pre-war period. The race question had become one of the pivots of Nazi ideology and policy. Masaryk and Beneš took the initiative of calling for a conference to re-establish in the minds and consciences of men everywhere the truth about race ... Nazi propaganda was able to continue its baleful work unopposed by the authority of an international organisation.

The Third Reich's racial policies, its eugenics programs and the extermination of Jews in the Holocaust, as well as the Romani people in the Porrajmos (the Romani Holocaust) and others minorities led to a change in opinions about scientific research into race after the war.[citation needed] Changes within scientific disciplines, such as the rise of the Boasian school of anthropology in the United States contributed to this shift. These theories were strongly denounced in the 1950 UNESCO statement, signed by internationally renowned scholars, and titled The Race Question.

Polygenism and racial typologies
Further information: Polygenism, Typology (anthropology), and Nordicism

Madison Grant's map, from 1916, charting the "present distribution of European races", with the Nordics in red, the Alpines in green, and the Mediterraneans in yellow
Works such as Arthur de Gobineau's An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races (1853–1855) may be considered one of the first theorizations of this new racism, founded on an essentialist notion of race, which opposed the former racial discourse, of Boulainvilliers for example, which saw in races a fundamentally historical reality, which changed over time. Gobineau, thus, attempted to frame racism within the terms of biological differences among humans, giving it the legitimacy of biology.

Gobineau's theories would be expanded in France by Georges Vacher de Lapouge (1854–1936)'s typology of races, who published in 1899 The Aryan and his Social Role, in which he claimed that the white "Aryan race" "dolichocephalic", was opposed to the "brachycephalic" race, of whom the "Jew" was the archetype. Vacher de Lapouge thus created a hierarchical classification of races, in which he identified the "Homo europaeus (Teutonic, Protestant, etc.), the "Homo alpinus" (Auvergnat, Turkish, etc.), and finally the "Homo mediterraneus" (Neapolitan, Andalus, etc.) He assimilated races and social classes, considering that the French upper class was a representation of the Homo europaeus, while the lower class represented the Homo alpinus. Applying Galton's eugenics to his theory of races, Vacher de Lapouge's "selectionism" aimed first at achieving the annihilation of trade unionists, considered to be a "degenerate"; second, creating types of man each destined to one end, in order to prevent any contestation of labour conditions. His "anthroposociology" thus aimed at blocking social conflict by establishing a fixed, hierarchical social order.[243]

The same year, William Z. Ripley used identical racial classification in The Races of Europe (1899), which would have a great influence in the United States. Other scientific authors include H.S. Chamberlain at the end of the 19th century (a British citizen who naturalized himself as German because of his admiration for the "Aryan race") and Madison Grant, a eugenicist and author of The Passing of the Great Race (1916). Madison Grant provided statistics for the Immigration Act of 1924, which severely restricted immigration of Jews, Slavs, and Southern Europeans, who were subsequently hindered in seeking to escape Nazi Germany.[244]

Human zoos
Human zoos (called "People Shows"), were an important means of bolstering popular racism by connecting it to scientific racism: they were both objects of public curiosity and of anthropology and anthropometry.[245][246] Joice Heth, an African-American slave, was displayed by P.T. Barnum in 1836, a few years after the exhibition of Saartjie Baartman, the "Hottentot Venus", in England. Such exhibitions became common in the New Imperialism period, and remained so until World War II. Carl Hagenbeck, inventor of the modern zoos, exhibited animals beside humans who were considered "savages".[247][248]

Congolese pygmy Ota Benga was displayed in 1906 by eugenicist Madison Grant, head of the Bronx Zoo, as an attempt to illustrate the "missing link" between humans and orangutans: thus, racism was tied to Darwinism, creating a social Darwinist ideology that tried to ground itself in Darwin's scientific discoveries. The 1931 Paris Colonial Exhibition displayed Kanaks from New Caledonia.[249] A "Congolese village" was on display as late as 1958 at the Brussels' World Fair.

Theories about the origins of racism
See also: Ethnocentrism and Tribalism

Sociological model of ethnic and racial conflict
Evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides were puzzled by the fact that in the US, race is one of the three characteristics most often used in brief descriptions of individuals (the others are age and sex). They reasoned that natural selection would not have favoured the evolution of an instinct for using race as a classification, because for most of human history, humans almost never encountered members of other races. Tooby and Cosmides hypothesized that modern people use race as a proxy (rough-and-ready indicator) for coalition membership, since a better-than-random guess about "which side" another person is on will be helpful if one does not actually know in advance.

Their colleague Robert Kurzban designed an experiment whose results appeared to support this hypothesis. Using the memory confusion protocol, they presented subjects with pictures of individuals and sentences, allegedly spoken by these individuals, which presented two sides of a debate. The errors that the subjects made in recalling who said what indicated that they sometimes mis-attributed a statement to a speaker of the same race as the "correct" speaker, although they also sometimes mis-attributed a statement to a speaker "on the same side" as the "correct" speaker. In a second run of the experiment, the team also distinguished the "sides" in the debate by clothing of similar colors; and in this case the effect of racial similarity in causing mistakes almost vanished, being replaced by the color of their clothing. In other words, the first group of subjects, with no clues from clothing, used race as a visual guide to guessing who was on which side of the debate; the second group of subjects used the clothing color as their main visual clue, and the effect of race became very small.[250]

Some research suggests that ethnocentric thinking may have actually contributed to the development of cooperation. Political scientists Ross Hammond and Robert Axelrod created a computer simulation wherein virtual individuals were randomly assigned one of a variety of skin colors, and then one of a variety of trading strategies: be color-blind, favor those of your own color, or favor those of other colors. They found that the ethnocentric individuals clustered together, then grew, until all the non-ethnocentric individuals were wiped out.[251]

In The Selfish Gene, evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins writes that "Blood-feuds and inter-clan warfare are easily interpretable in terms of Hamilton's genetic theory." Dawkins writes that racial prejudice, while not evolutionarily adaptive, "could be interpreted as an irrational generalization of a kin-selected tendency to identify with individuals physically resembling oneself, and to be nasty to individuals different in appearance."[252] Simulation-based experiments in evolutionary game theory have attempted to provide an explanation for the selection of ethnocentric-strategy phenotypes.[253]

Despite support for evolutionary theories relating to an innate origin of racism, various studies have suggested racism is associated with lower intelligence and less diverse peer groups during childhood. A neuroimaging study on amygdala activity during racial matching activities found increased activity to be associated with adolescent age as well as less racially diverse peer groups, which the author conclude suggest a learned aspect of racism.[254] A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies found amygdala activity correlated to increased scores on implicit measures of racial bias. It was also argued amygdala activity in response to racial stimuli represents increased threat perception rather than the traditional theory of the amygdala activity represented ingroup-outgroup processing.[255] Racism has also been associated with lower childhood IQ in an analysis of 15,000 people in the UK.[256]

Psychological causes
A 2017 study in the American Political Science Review found that prejudice towards marginalized groups, such as refugees, could be explained by a failure to take the perspective of the marginalized group.[257] The study found that young Hungarian adults who played a perspective-taking game (a game intended to reduce prejudice towards marginalized groups by having players assume the role of a member of a marginalized group) showed reduced prejudice towards Romani people and refugees, as well as reduced their vote intentions for Hungary's overtly racist, far right party by 10%.[257]

State-sponsored racism
Main articles: Nazism and race, Racial policy of Nazi Germany, Racial antisemitism, Eugenics in Showa Japan, Apartheid in South Africa, Racial segregation in the United States, Ketuanan Melayu, Anti-Chinese legislation in Indonesia, and White Australia policy
State racism—the institutions and practices of a nation-state that are grounded in racist ideology—has played a major role in all instances of settler colonialism, from the United States to Australia.[citation needed] It also played a prominent role in the Nazi German regime, in fascist regimes throughout Europe, and during the early years of Japan's Shōwa period. These governments advocated and implemented ideologies and policies that were racist, xenophobic, and, in the case of Nazism, genocidal.[258][259]

The Nuremberg Race Laws of 1935 prohibited sexual relations between any Aryan and Jew, considering it Rassenschande, "racial pollution". The Nuremberg Laws stripped all Jews, even quarter- and half-Jews (second and first degree Mischlings), of their German citizenship. This meant that they had no basic citizens' rights, e.g., the right to vote. In 1936, Jews were banned from all professional jobs, effectively preventing them from having any influence in education, politics, higher education, and industry. On 15 November 1938, Jewish children were banned from going to normal schools. By April 1939, nearly all Jewish companies had either collapsed under financial pressure and declining profits, or had been persuaded to sell out to the Nazi government. This further reduced their rights as human beings; they were in many ways officially separated from the German populace. Similar laws existed in Bulgaria (The Law for protection of the nation), Hungary, Romania, and Austria.

Legislative state racism is known to have been enforced by the National Party of South Africa during its Apartheid regime between 1948 and 1994. Here, a series of Apartheid legislation was passed through the legal systems to make it legal for white South Africans to have rights which were superior to those of non-white South Africans. Non-white South Africans were not allowed involvement in any governing matters, including voting; access to quality healthcare; the provision of basic services, including clean water; electricity; as well as access to adequate schooling. Non-white South Africans were also prevented from accessing certain public areas, from using certain public transportation, and were required to live only in certain designated areas. Non-white South Africans were taxed differently than white South Africans and they were also required to carry on them at all times additional documentation, which later became known as "dom passes", to certify their non-white South African citizenship. All of these legislative racial laws were abolished through a series of equal human rights laws which were passed at the end of the Apartheid era in the early 1990s.

Separate "white" and "colored" entrances to a café in North Carolina, 1940
Separate "white" and "colored" entrances to a café in North Carolina, 1940
 
1935 Chart from Nazi Germany used to explain the Nuremberg Laws, defining which Germans were to be considered Jews and stripped of their citizenship. Germans with three or more Jewish grandparents were defined as Jews, Germans with one or two Jewish grandparents were deemed Mischling (mixed-blood).
1935 Chart from Nazi Germany used to explain the Nuremberg Laws, defining which Germans were to be considered Jews and stripped of their citizenship. Germans with three or more Jewish grandparents were defined as Jews, Germans with one or two Jewish grandparents were deemed Mischling (mixed-blood).
 
19th century political cartoon: Uncle Sam kicks out the Chinaman, referring to the Chinese Exclusion Act
19th century political cartoon: Uncle Sam kicks out the Chinaman, referring to the Chinese Exclusion Act
Anti-racism
Main article: Anti-racism

Demonstration against racism in Helsinki, Finland 2023
Anti-racism includes beliefs, actions, scholarship, movements, and policies which are adopted or developed in order to oppose racism. In general, it promotes an egalitarian society in which people are not discriminated against on the basis of race. Examples of anti-racist movements include the civil rights movement, the Anti-Apartheid Movement and Black Lives Matter. Socialist groups have also been closely aligned with a number of anti-racist organizations such as Anti-Nazi League[260] and Unite Against Fascism.[261] Nonviolent resistance is sometimes embraced as an element of anti-racist movements, although this was not always the case. Hate crime laws, affirmative action, and bans on racist speech are also examples of government policy which is intended to suppress racism.

Reverse racism
Reverse racism is a concept often used to describe acts of discrimination or hostility against members of a dominant racial or ethnic group while favoring members of minority groups.[70][71] This concept has been used especially in the United States in debates over color-conscious policies (such as affirmative action) intended to remedy racial inequalities.[262] However, many experts and other commenters view reverse racism as a myth rather than a reality.[263][264][265][266] From the substantive equality perspective, while members of ethnic minorities may be prejudiced against members of the dominant culture, they lack the political and economic power to actively oppress them, and they are therefore not practicing the "Prejudice plus power" definition of racism.[1][70][267] Martha Minow refers to the differences between formal equality of opportunity and substantive equality as the Dilemma of difference.[268] According to Richard Arneson affirmative action violates formal equality of opportunity.[269]

See also
Afrophobia
Allport's Scale
Anti-Black racism
Anti-white racism
Aporophobia
Christian Identity
Covert racism
Creativity (religion)
Curse and mark of Cain
Curse of Ham
Discrimination based on skin color
Environmental racism
Environmental racism in Europe
Ethnic hatred
Hate crime
Hate speech
Hipster racism
Historical trauma
Identitarianism
Index of racism-related articles
In-group favoritism
Internalized racism
Labeling theory
Minority stress
Nigger
Racial bias in criminal news
Racial bias on Wikipedia
Racial fetishism
Racial literacy
Racialization
Raciolinguistics
Racist pre-Adamism
Racism in horror films
Racism in the LGBT community
Redlining
Reverse discrimination
Romantic racism
Social interpretations of race
Speciesism
Stereotype threat
Tatarophobia
Tragic mulatto
Yellow Peril
References
 Dennis, R. M. (2004). "Racism". In Kuper, A.; Kuper, J. (eds.). The Social Science Encyclopedia, Volume 2 (3rd ed.). London; New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-35969-1. Racism [is] the idea that there is a direct correspondence between a group's values, behavior and attitudes, and its physical features ... Racism is also a relatively new idea: its birth can be traced to the European colonization of much of the world, the rise and development of European capitalism, and the development of the European and US slave trade.
 Ghani, Navid (2008). "Racism". In Schaefer, Richard T. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society. Sage. pp. 1113–1115. ISBN 978-1-4129-2694-2.
 Newman, David M. (2012). Sociology: Exploring the Architecture of Everyday Life (9th ed.). Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE Publications. p. 405. ISBN 978-1-4129-8729-5. Racism: Belief that humans are subdivided into distinct groups that are different in their social behavior and innate capacities and that can be ranked as superior or inferior.
 "International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination". Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 21 December 1965. Archived from the original on 2 July 2024. Retrieved 23 December 2011.
 Conroy, William (2024). "Race, Capitalism, and the Necessity/Contingency Debate". Theory, Culture & Society. 41: 39–58. doi:10.1177/02632764221140780.
 Lieberman, Leonard (1997). ""Race" 1997 and 2001: A Race Odyssey" (PDF). American Anthropological Association. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 April 2024. In the period since 1492, European overseas empires and colonies were established ... The establishment of mines and plantations enriched Europe while impoverishing and decimating the conquered and enslaved peoples in Africa and the New World. The race concept helped to give all this the appearance of scientific justification.
 Fredrickson, George M. (1988). The arrogance of race: historical perspectives on slavery, racism, and social inequality. Middletown, Conn: Wesleyan University Press.
 Reilly, Kevin; Kaufman, Stephen; Bodino, Angela (2003). Racism: a global reader. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. pp. 45–52. ISBN 978-0-7656-1060-7.
 Martin, Terry (1998). "The Origins of Soviet Ethnic Cleansing" (PDF). The Journal of Modern History. 70 (4): 813–861. doi:10.1086/235168. JSTOR 10.1086/235168. S2CID 32917643. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 May 2024.
 Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary. Merriam-Webster, Inc. 1983. p. 969. ISBN 0-87779-508-8.
 "race (n2)". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 4 April 2024. Retrieved 21 February 2016.
 Garner, Steve (2009). Racisms: An Introduction. Sage. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
 "Racism". The Canadian Encyclopedia. 2013. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019. Retrieved 21 February 2016.
 Multiple sources:
"Framework decision on combating racism and xenophobia". Council Framework Decision 2008/913/JHA of 28 November 2008. European Union. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
"International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination". UN Treaty Series. United Nations. Archived from the original on 4 August 2011. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
 Bamshad, Michael; Olson, Steve E. (December 2003). "Does Race Exist?". Scientific American. 289 (6): 78–85. Bibcode:2003SciAm.289f..78B. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1203-78. PMID 14631734. If races are defined as genetically discrete groups, no. Researchers can, however, use some genetic information to group individuals into clusters with medical relevance.
 Patrinos, Ari (2004). "'Race' and the human genome". Nature Genetics. 36 (S1 – S2): S1 – S2. doi:10.1038/ng2150. PMID 15510100.
 Keita, Shomarka O. Y. & Kittles, Rick A. (1997). "The persistence of racial thinking and the myth of racial divergence" (PDF). American Anthropologist. 99 (3): 534–544. doi:10.1525/aa.1997.99.3.534. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 10 March 2016.
 Smedley, Audrey & Brian D. Smedley (2005). "Race as biology is fiction, racism as a social problem is real: Anthropological and historical perspectives on the social construction of race". American Psychologist. 60 (1): 16–26. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.694.7956. doi:10.1037/0003-066x.60.1.16. PMID 15641918.
 Yudell, M.; Roberts, D.; DeSalle, R.; Tishkoff, S. (5 February 2016). "Taking race out of human genetics". Science. 351 (6273): 564–565. Bibcode:2016Sci...351..564Y. doi:10.1126/science.aac4951. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 26912690. S2CID 206639306.
 "racialism, n." OED Online. September 2013. Oxford University Press. (Accessed 3 December 2013).
 "racism, n.". OED Online. September 2013. Oxford University Press. Accessed 3 December 2013.
 Fredrickson, George M. (2002). Racism: A Short History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-691-11652-5. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016.
 Bethencourt, Francisco (2014). Racisms: From the Crusades to the Twentieth Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". United Nations. 6 October 2015. Archived from the original on 31 October 2017. Retrieved 22 February 2016.
 "International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination". United Nations. Adopted December 1965, entered into force January 1969. Archived from the original on 2 July 2024. Retrieved 22 February 2016.
 "Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice". United Nations. 1978. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2016.
 Metraux, A. (1950). "United nations Economic and Security Council Statement by Experts on Problems of Race". American Anthropologist. 53 (1): 142–145. doi:10.1525/aa.1951.53.1.02a00370.
 "Racist and Religious Crime – CPS Prosecution Policy". The CPS. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 Holgersen, Jon Dagsland (23 July 2010). "Rasebegrepet på vei ut av loven" [The concept of race on the way out of the law]. Aftenposten (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 4 April 2024. Retrieved 6 March 2017.
 "Rase: Et ubrukelig ord" [Race: A useless word]. Aftenposten (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 1 March 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2013.
 Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion (26 September 2005). "The Act on prohibition of discrimination based on ethnicity, religion, etc". Regjeringen.no. Archived from the original on 19 March 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2013.
 Gossett, Thomas F. Race: The History of an Idea in America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-19-509778-5
 Feagin, Joe R. (2000). Racist America: Roots, Current Realities, and Future Reparations. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-92531-0.
 Du Bois, W. E. B. (1903). The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Bantam Classic.
 Wellman, David T. (1993). Portraits of White Racism. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. x.
 Massey, D. & Denton, N. (1989). "Hypersegregation in U.S. Metropolitan areas: Black and Hispanic Segregation Along Five Dimensions". Demography. 26 (3): 378–379. doi:10.2307/2061599. JSTOR 2061599. PMID 2792476. S2CID 37301240.
 Cazenave, Noel A. & Maddern, Darlene Alvarez (1999). "Defending the White Race: White Male Faculty Opposition to a White Racism Course". Race and Society. 2 (1): 25–50. doi:10.1016/s1090-9524(00)00003-6.
 Sellers, R. M. & Shelton, J. N. (2003). "The role of racial identity in perceived racial discrimination". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 84 (5): 1079–1092. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.5.1079. PMID 12757150.
 Greenwald, A.G.; Banaji, M. R. (1995). "Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes". Psychological Review. 102 (1): 4–27. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.304.6161. doi:10.1037/0033-295x.102.1.4. PMID 7878162. S2CID 8194189.
 Devos, T. (2008). "Attitudes and attitude change". Implicit attitudes 101: Theoretical and empirical Insights. New York: Psychology Press. pp. 61–84.
 Gawronski, B.; Payne, B. K. (2010). Handbook of Implicit Social Cognition: Measurement, Theory and Application. Guilford Press. ISBN 978-1-60623-674-1.
 Eberhardt, Jennifer L.; et al. (2004). "Seeing Black: Race, Crime, and Visual Processing". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 87 (6): 876–893. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.408.3542. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.87.6.876. PMID 15598112. S2CID 6322610.
 Belenko, Steven & Spohn, Cassia (2014). Drugs, Crime, and Justice. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4833-1295-8.
 Yékú, James (3 May 2020). "Anti-Afropolitan ethics and the performative politics of online scambaiting". Social Dynamics. 46 (2): 240–258. doi:10.1080/02533952.2020.1813943. S2CID 222232833.
 Van Dijk, Tuen (1992). Analyzing Racism Through Discourse Analysis Some Methodological Reflections in Race and Ethnicity in Research Methods. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications. pp. 92–134. ISBN 978-0-8039-5007-8.
 Watson, Veronica T. (2013). The Souls of White Folk: African American Writers Theorize Whiteness. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi. p. 137. ISBN 978-1-4968-0245-3.
 "Definition of racism in English". Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 3 January 2018.
 "Definition of racism". Merriam-Webster. Archived from the original on 25 December 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2018.
 Blay, Zeba (26 August 2015). "'Reverse Racism': 4 Myths That Need To Stop". Huffpost Black Voices. Archived from the original on 11 May 2024. Retrieved 28 February 2016.
 McWhorter, Ladelle (2009). Racism and sexual oppression in Anglo-America: a genealogy. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-35296-5. OCLC 406565635.
 Hoyt, Carlos (2012). "The Pedagogy of the Meaning of Racism: Reconciling a Discordant Discourse". Social Work. 57 (3): 225–234. doi:10.1093/sw/sws009. ISSN 0037-8046. JSTOR 23719752. PMID 23252314.
 Dovidio, John F.; Gaertner, Samuel L., eds. (1986). "The aversive form of racism". Prejudice, Discrimination and Racism. Academic Press. pp. 61–89. ISBN 978-0-12-221425-7.
 Dovidio, John F.; Gaertner, Samuel L. (2004). "Aversive Racism". In Olson, James M.; Zanna, Mark P. (eds.). Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. Vol. 36. pp. 1–52. doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(04)36001-6. ISBN 978-0-12-015236-0.
 Saucier, Donald A.; Miller, Carol T.; Doucet, Nicole (2005). "Differences in Helping Whites and Blacks: A Meta-Analysis". Personality and Social Psychology Review. 9 (1): 2–16. doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0901_1. PMID 15745861. S2CID 14542705.
 Ansell, Amy E. (2008). "Color Blindness". In Schaefer, Richard T. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society. SAGE Publications. pp. 320–322. ISBN 978-1-4522-6586-5.
 Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2001). White Supremacy and Racism in the Post-Civil Rights Era. Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc. pp. 137–166. ISBN 978-1-58826-032-1.
 Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2003). Racism without Racists: Color-blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in the United States. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 2–29. ISBN 978-0-7425-1633-5.
 Parker, Laurence (1999). Race Is – Race Isn't: Critical Race Theory and Qualitative Studies in Education. Westview Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-8133-9069-7.
 Ballantine, Jeanne H.; Roberts, Keith A. (2015). Our Social World: Introduction to Sociology (Condensed Version) (3rd ed.). Los Angeles: Sage. ISBN 978-1-4522-7575-8.
 "xenophobia - European Commission". home-affairs.ec.europa.eu. Archived from the original on 1 July 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2024.
 Kundnani, Arun (1 October 2002). "An Unholy Alliance? Racism, Religion and Communalism". Race & Class. 44 (2): 71–80. doi:10.1177/0306396802044002976. ISSN 0306-3968. S2CID 145013667.
 Wren, Karen (2001). "Cultural racism: Something rotten in the state of Denmark?". Social & Cultural Geography. 2 (2): 141–162. doi:10.1080/14649360120047788. S2CID 33883381.
 Blaut, James M. (1992). "The Theory of Cultural Racism". Antipode: A Radical Journal of Geography. 24 (4): 289–299. Bibcode:1992Antip..24..289B. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8330.1992.tb00448.x. Archived from the original on 13 February 2024.
 Conroy, William. "Race, capitalism, and the necessity/contingency debate." Theory, Culture & Society 41.1 (2024): 39-58.
 Lewis, Sarah (15 September 2019). "The Racial Bias Built Into Photography". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2024. Retrieved 4 December 2020.
 Fussell, Sidney (17 August 2017). "Why Can't This Soap Dispenser Identify Dark Skin?". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on 5 July 2024. Retrieved 4 December 2020.
 Lohr, Steve (9 February 2018). "Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You're a White Guy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 March 2024. Retrieved 4 December 2020.
 Race, Richard W., Analysing ethnic education policy-making in England and Wales (PDF), Sheffield Online Papers in Social Research, University of Sheffield, p. 12, archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2006, retrieved 20 June 2006
 Karenga, Maulana (22–23 June 2001). "The Ethics of Reparations: Engaging the Holocaust of Enslavement" (PDF). The National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America (N'COBRA). Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017.
 Cashmore, Ellis, ed. (2004). "Reverse Racism/Discrimination". Encyclopedia of Race and Ethnic Studies. Routledge. p. 373. ISBN 978-1-134-44706-0.
 Yee, June Ying (2008). "Racism, Types of". In Shaefer, Richard T. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society. SAGE Publications. pp. 1118–1119. ISBN 978-1-4129-2694-2.
 Mountz, Alison (2009). Key Concepts in Political Geography. Sage. p. 328.
 Said, Edward (1978). Orientalism. New York: Pantheon Books. p. 357.
 Gregory, Derek (2004). The Colonial Present. Blackwell publishers. p. 4.
 Said 1978, p. 360.
 Principles to Guide Housing Policy at the Beginning of the Millennium, Michael Schill & Susan Wachter, Cityscape
 Fujitani, Takashi; White, Geoffrey Miles; Yoneyama, Lisa (2001). Perilous memories: the Asia-Pacific War(s). Duke University Press. p. 303. ISBN 978-0-8223-2564-2.
 Miller, Stuart Creighton (1984). Benevolent Assimilation: The American Conquest of the Philippines, 1899–1903. Yale University Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-300-03081-5. ... imperialist editors came out in favor of retaining the entire archipelago (using) higher-sounding justifications related to the "white man's burden".
 "In Our Pages: 100, 75 and 50 Years Ago; 1899: Kipling's Plea". International Herald Tribune. 4 February 1999. p. 6 col 6 – via Internet Archive Digital Library. : Notes that Rudyard Kipling's new poem, "The White Man's Burden", "is regarded as the strongest argument yet published in favor of expansion".
 Out West. University of Nebraska Press. 2000. p. 96.
 "Facebook labels declaration of independence as 'hate speech'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 March 2024. Retrieved 7 August 2019.
 "L. Frank Baum's Editorials on the Sioux Nation". Archived from the original on 9 December 2007. Retrieved 9 December 2007. Full text of both, with commentary by professor A. Waller Hastings
 "Fact check: Quotes from prominent American statesmen on race are accurate". Reuters. 6 July 2020. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2022.
 Aronson, E.; Wilson, T. D.; Akert, R. M. (2010). Social Psychology (7th ed.). New York: Pearson.
 McConahay, J. B. (1983). "Modern Racism and Modern Discrimination The Effects of Race, Racial Attitudes, and Context on Simulated Hiring Decisions". Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 9 (4): 551–558. doi:10.1177/0146167283094004. S2CID 144674550.
 Brief, A. P.; Dietz, J.; Cohen, R. R.; Pugh, S. D.; Vaslow, J. B. (2000). "Just doing business: Modern racism and obedience to authority as explanations for employment discrimination". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 81 (1): 72–97. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.201.4044. doi:10.1006/obhd.1999.2867. PMID 10631069.
 McConahay, J. B. (1986). Modern racism, ambivalence, and the modern racism scale.
 Pettigrew, T. F. (1989). "The nature of modern racism in the United States". Revue Internationale de Psychologie Sociale.
 Staff (30 March 2015). "How the biases in the back of your mind affect how you feel about race". PBS Newshour. Archived from the original on 18 April 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2017.
 Chen, C. Peter (23 February 1945). "Joint Declaration of the Greater East Asia Conference (below)". Ww2db.com. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. Retrieved 26 January 2011.
 "Toward a World without Evil: Alfred Métraux as UNESCO Anthropologist (1946–1962)", by Harald E.L. Prins, UNESCO
 "European Court of Human Rights case law factsheet on racial discrimination" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 26 January 2011.
 Text of the Convention Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1966
 "Charter of European Political Parties for a non-racist society". 28 February 1998. Archived from the original on 21 April 2003.
 Pierre-André Taguieff, La force du préjugé, 1987 (in French)
 "Racestudier i Danmark" [Race Studies in Denmark] (PDF). Geografisk Tidsskrift (in Danish). 19. 1907. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 April 2024. Retrieved 14 November 2013.
 Du Bois, W. E. B. (1897). "The Conservation of Races". p. 21. Archived from the original on 29 March 2013. Retrieved 16 July 2007.
 Turda, Marius (2004). The idea of national superiority in Central Europe, 1880–1918. Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 978-0-7734-6180-2.
 National Analytical Study on Racist Violence and Crime, RAXEN Focal Point for Italy – Annamaria Rivera FRA. "Helping to make fundamental rights a reality for everyone in the European Union" (PDF). European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 22 August 2010.
 Graves, Joseph L. (2001). The Emperor's new clothes: biological theories of race at the millennium. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-2847-2.
 Inter-American Convention against Racism and all forms of Discrimination and Intolerance – Study prepared by the Inter-American Juridical Committee 2002
 Richter, Facing East from Indian Country, p. 208
 Fredrickson, George M. 1988. The Arrogance of Race: Historical Perspectives on Slavery, Racism, and Social Inequality. Middletown, Conn: Wesleyan University Press
 UN General Assembly, Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10 December 1948, 217 A (III), available at: [1] [accessed 18 July 2012]
 On this "nationalities question" and the problem of nationalism, see the relevant articles for a non-exhaustive account of the state of contemporary historical researches; famous works include: Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (1983); Eric Hobsbawm,The Age of Revolution : Europe 1789–1848 (1962), Nations and Nationalism since 1780 : programme, myth, reality (1990); Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (1991); Charles Tilly, Coercion, Capital and European States AD 990–1992 (1990); Anthony D. Smith, Theories of Nationalism (1971), etc.
 John Stuart Mill, Considerations on Representative Government, 1861
 Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951)
 Maurice Barrès, Le Roman de l'énergie nationale (The Novel of National Energy, a trilogy started in 1897)
 Hess, Richard S. (2016). The Old Testament: A Historical, Theological, and Critical Introduction. Baker Academic. p. 59. ISBN 978-1-4934-0573-2. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
 Reilly, Kevin; Kaufman, Stephen; Bodino, Angela (2002). Racism: A Global Reader. M. E. Sharpe. pp. 52–58. ISBN 978-0-7656-1060-7.
 Lewis, Bernard (1992). Race and slavery in the Middle East: an historical enquiry. Oxford University Press. pp. 54–55. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5.
 "Aristotle on Slavery". Oregon State University. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013. Retrieved 14 November 2013.
 Isaac, Benjamin H. (2006). The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 978-0-691-12598-5. Retrieved 14 November 2013.
 Puzzo, Dante A. (1964). "Racism and the Western Tradition". Journal of the History of Ideas. 25 (4): 579–586. doi:10.2307/2708188. JSTOR 2708188.
 Flannery, Edward H. (1985). The Anguish of the Jews: Twenty-three Centuries of Antisemitism. Paulist Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-8091-4324-5.
 Gruen, Erich S. (1993). "Hellenism and Persecution: Antiochus IV and the Jews". In Green, Peter (ed.). Hellenistic History and Culture. University of California Press. pp. 250–252.
 Benjamin Isaac, The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity (Princeton University Press 2004).
 Seth, Vanita (19 August 2022). "When Did Racism Begin? The history of race has animated a highly contentious debate". The Chronicle of Higher Education.
 Tcherikover, Victor, Hellenistic Civilization and the Jews, New York: Atheneum, 1975
 Bohak, Gideon. "The Ibis and the Jewish Question: Ancient 'Antisemitism' in Historical Context" in Menachem Mor et al., Jews and Gentiles in the Holy Land in the Days of the Second Temple, the Mishna and the Talmud, Yad Ben-Zvi Press, 2003, pp. 27–43.
 Lewis, Bernard (1992). Race and slavery in the Middle East: an historical enquiry. Oxford University Press. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5.
 Khalid, Abdallah (1977). The Liberation of Swahili from European Appropriation. East African Literature Bureau. p. 38. Retrieved 10 June 2014.
 El Hamel, Chouki (2002). "'Race', slavery and Islam in Maghribi Mediterranean thought: the question of the Haratin in Morocco". The Journal of North African Studies. 7 (3): 29–52 [39–40]. doi:10.1080/13629380208718472. S2CID 219625829. Neither in the Qur'an nor in the Hadith is there any indication of racial difference among humankind. But as a consequence of the Arab conquests, a mutual assimilation between Islam and the cultural and the scriptural traditions of Christian and Jewish populations occurred. Racial distinctions between humankind with reference to the sons of Noah is found in the Babylonian Talmud, a collection of rabbinic writings which dates back to the sixth century.
 Lewis, Bernard (1992). Race and slavery in the Middle East: an historical enquiry. Oxford University Press. pp. 28–34. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5.
 Lewis, Bernard (2002). Race and Slavery in the Middle East. Oxford University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5.
 "West Asian views on black Africans during the medieval era". Colorq.org. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 Hannoum, Abdelmajid (1 January 2003). "Translation and the Colonial Imaginary: Ibn Khaldûn Orientalist". History and Theory. 42 (1): 61–81. doi:10.1111/1468-2303.00230. JSTOR 3590803.
 Lindsay, James E. (2005). Daily Life in the Medieval Islamic World. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 12–15. ISBN 978-0-313-32270-9.
 Hoyland, Robert G. (2002). Arabia and the Arabs. Taylor & Francis. p. 229. ISBN 9781134646357.
 Collins, Roger (1995). The Arab Conquest of Spain: 710–797. Wiley. ISBN 9780631194057.
 Sephardim. Jewish Virtual Library. Last accessed 27 December 2011.
 O'Callaghan, Joseph F. (2013). Reconquest and Crusade in Medieval Spain. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-0306-6.
 A. Chami, Pablo. "Limpieza de Sangre" [Cleanliness of blood] (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 1 August 2016.
 Lacey, Robert (1983). Aristocrats. Little, Brown and Company. p. 67.
 Sicroff, Albert A. Los estatutos de Limpieza de Sangre (in Spanish). p. 121.
 Colección Legislativa de España (1870), p. 364
 Avrum Ehrlich, Mark (2009). Encyclopedia of the Jewish diaspora: origins, experiences, and culture. ABC-CLIO. p. 689. ISBN 978-1-85109-873-6.
 Ginés de Sepúlveda, Juan (trans. Marcelino Menendez y Pelayo and Manuel Garcia-Pelayo) (1941). Tratado sobre las Justas Causas de la Guerra contra los Indios. Mexico D.F.: Fondo de Cultura Económica. p. 155.
 Hernandez, Bonar Ludwig (2001). "The Las Casas-Sepúlveda Controversy: 1550–1551" (PDF). Ex Post Facto. 10: 95–104. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 April 2015.
 Francis, J. Michael, Luisa de Abrego: Marriage, Bigamy, and the Spanish Inquisition, laflorida.org, archived from the original on 4 February 2021, retrieved 5 April 2018
 Acuña, Rodolfo F. (2010). Occupied America: A History of Chicanos (7th ed.). Boston: Longman. pp. 23–24. ISBN 978-0-205-78618-3.
 "The World; Racism? Mexico's in Denial". The New York Times. 11 June 1995. Archived from the original on 20 September 2023.
 Michel Foucault, Society Must Be Defended (1976–77)
 Academic Press (2000). " Encyclopedia of Nationalism, Two-Volume Set, Volume 2".
 "Royal Navy and the Slave Trade : Battles : History". Royal-navy.mod.uk. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 "Chasing Freedom Exhibition: the Royal Navy and the Suppression of the Transatlantic Slave Trade". Royalnavalmuseum.org. 21 November 2006. Archived from the original on 10 December 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 Ronald James Harrison, Africa and the Islands, (Wiley: 1965), p. 58
 Dorothy Dodge, African Politics in Perspective, (Van Nostrand: 1966), p. 11
 Michael Senior, Tropical Lands: a human geography, (Longman: 1979), p. 59
 A.H.M. Jones, Elizabeth Monroe, History of Abyssinia, (Kessinger Publishing: 2003), p. 25
 "Background on conflict in Liberia". Fcnl.org. 30 July 2003. Archived from the original on 8 January 2011. Retrieved 26 January 2011.
 Maggie Montesinos Sale (1997). The Slumbering Volcano: American Slave Ship Revolts and the Production of Rebellious Masculinity. p. 264. Duke University Press, 1997
 Galton, Francis (9 June 1873). "Africa for the Chinese". The London and China Telegraph. Vol. 15, no. 510. London.
 Gumkowski, Janusz; Leszczynski, Kazimierz. "Hitler's Plans for Eastern Europe". Poland under Nazi Occupation. Archived from the original on 27 July 2007.
 Davies, Norman (2006). Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory. Macmillan Pubs (pp. 167, 4).
 Operation Barbarossa: Ideology and Ethics against Human Dignity, by André Mineau, (Rodopi, 2004) p. 180
 Mastný, Vojtěch (1971). The Czechs under Nazi Rule: The Failure of National Resistance, 1939–1942. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0231033036.[page needed]
 Historical Dictionary of the Holocaust, p. 175 Jack R. Fischel. 2010. The policy of Lebensraum was also the product of Nazi racial ideology, which held that the Slavic peoples of the east were inferior to the Aryan race.
 Hitler's Home Front: Wurttemberg Under the Nazis, Jill Stephenson p. 135, Other non-'Aryans' included Slavs, Blacks and Roma.
 Race Relations Within Western Expansion, p. 98 Alan J. Levine. 1996. Preposterously, Central European Aryan theorists, and later the Nazis, would insist that the Slavic-speaking peoples were not really Aryans
 The Politics of Fertility in Twentieth-Century Berlin, p. 118 Annette F. Timm. 2010. The Nazis' singleminded desire to "purify" the German race through the elimination of non-Aryans (particularly Jews, Gypsies, and Slavs)
 Curta 2001, p. 9, 26–30.
 Jerry Bergman, "Eugenics and the Development of Nazi Race Policy", Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith PSCF 44 (June 1992): 109–124
 "Holocaust Encyclopedia – Genocide of European Roma (Gypsies), 1939–1945". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM). Archived from the original on 19 June 2024. Retrieved 9 August 2011.
 Pauwels, Jacques R. The Great Class War 1914–1918. Formac Publishing Company Limited. p. 88.
 Gumkowski, Janusz; Leszczynski, Kazimierz (1961). Hitler's Plans for Eastern Europe. Poland Under Nazi Occupation. Translated by Rothert, Edward (First ed.). Polonia Pub. House. OCLC 750570006.
 Norman Davies. Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory. pp. 167, 209.
 Daniel Goldhagen, Hitler's Willing Executioners (p. 290) – "2.8 million young, healthy Soviet POWs" killed by the Germans, "mainly by starvation ... in less than eight months" of 1941–42, before "the decimation of Soviet POWs ... was stopped" and the Germans "began to use them as laborers".
 Norman Davies, Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory Publisher: Pan Books, 2007, 544 pages, ISBN 978-0-330-35212-3
 Terles, Mikolaj (2008). Ethnic Cleansing of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia: 1942–1946. Original from the University of Michigan. Alliance of the Polish Eastern Provinces, Toronto Branch, 1993. ISBN 978-0-9698020-0-6 – via Google Books, search inside.
 Kallis, Aristotle (2008). Genocide and Fascism: The Eliminationist Drive in Fascist Europe. Routledge. pp. 130–134. ISBN 9781134300341.
 Yeomans, Rory (2015). The Utopia of Terror: Life and Death in Wartime Croatia. Boydell & Brewer. ISBN 9781580465458.
 Payne, Stanley G. (2006). "The NDH State in Comparative Perspective". Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions. 7 (4): 409–415. doi:10.1080/14690760600963198. S2CID 144782263.
 Yeomans, Rory (2012). Visions of Annihilation: The Ustasha Regime and the Cultural Politics of Fascism, 1941–1945. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 7. ISBN 9780822977933.
 Bartulin, Nevenko (2013). The Racial Idea in the Independent State of Croatia: Origins and Theory. BRILL. p. 124. ISBN 9789004262829.
 Kenrick, Donald (2006). The Final Chapter. University of Hertfordshire Press. p. 92. ISBN 9781902806495.
 Bloxham, Donald; Gerwarth, Robert (2011). Political Violence in Twentieth-Century Europe. Cambridge University Press. p. 111. ISBN 9781139501293.
 Levy, Michele Frucht (2009). ""The Last Bullet for the Last Serb": The Ustaša Genocide against Serbs: 1941–1945". Nationalities Papers. 37 (6): 807–837. doi:10.1080/00905990903239174. S2CID 162231741.
 Dulić, Tomislav (2006). "Mass killing in the Independent State of Croatia, 1941–1945: a case for comparative research". Journal of Genocide Research. 8: 255–2281. doi:10.1111/nana.12433. S2CID 242057219.
 Charny, Israel (1999). Encyclopedia of Genocide: A–H. ABC-CLIO. pp. 18–23. ISBN 978-0874369281.
 Whitman, James Q. (2017). Hitler's American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law. Princeton University Press. pp. 37–43.
 "American laws against 'coloreds' influenced Nazi racial planners". Times of Israel. Retrieved 23 September 2017
 Westermann, Edward. B. (2016). Hitler's Ostkrieg and the Indian Wars: Comparing Genocide and Conquest. University of Oklahoma Press. p. 3.
 Whitman, James Q. (2017). Hitler's American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law. Princeton University Press. p. 47.
 Fredrickson, George (1981). White Supremacy. Oxford Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-19-503042-6.
 Ludden, Jennifer (9 May 2006). "1965 immigration law changed face of America". NPR. NPR. Archived from the original on 2 July 2024. Retrieved 7 December 2016.
 Sohi, Seema (2014). Echoes of Mutiny: Race, Surveillance, and Indian Anticolonialism in North America. Oxford University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-19-937625-4. During the early decades of the twentieth century, US Immigration, Justice, and State Department officials cast Indian anticolonialists as a "Hindu" menace
 Zhao, X. & Park, E.J.W. (2013). Asian Americans: An Encyclopedia of Social, Cultural, Economic, and Political History. Greenwood. p. 1142. ISBN 978-1-59884-239-5
 Schultz, Jeffrey D. (2002). Encyclopedia of Minorities in American Politics: African Americans and Asian Americans. p. 284.
 "Roots in the Sand – the Archives". PBS. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 6 December 2016.
 "Current race riots like 1949 anti-Indian riots: South African minister". Thaindian News. 25 May 2008. Archived from the original on 26 August 2018.
 Smith, Martin (1991). Burma – Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity. London; New Jersey: Zed Books. pp. 43–44, 56–57, 98, 176.
 "Burma: Asians v. Asians". Time. 17 July 1964. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008.
 Conley, Robert (13 January 1964). "African Revolt Overturns Arab Regime in Zanzibar". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 May 2024. Retrieved 16 November 2008.
 Plekhanov, Sergey (2004). A Reformer on the Throne: Sultan Qaboos Bin Said Al Said. Trident Press. p. 91. ISBN 978-1-900724-70-8.
 Goede, Meike de (2017). Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late Colonialism. CRC Press. p. 12.
 Rahemtulla, K. Where In the World Should I Invest: An Insider's Guide to Making Money Around the Globe. John Wiley & Sons. p. 156.
 "1972: Asians given 90 days to leave Uganda". On This Day. BBC. Archived from the original on 14 June 2024.
 Gallagher, Michael (17 June 2002). "The birth and death of apartheid". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 December 2023.
 Staff reporters (11 September 2011). "ANC's youth leader found guilty of hate speech for Shoot the Boer song". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 September 2011.
 "DR Congo Pygmies appeal to UN". BBC News. 23 May 2003. Archived from the original on 7 May 2024. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 UN Condems [sic] Botswana's Racism. Survival International. 31 August 2002.
 "Stop your racist land grab, tribunal tells Robert Mugabe". The Times. 5 March 2009. Archived from the original on 3 April 2024.
 Freeman, Colin (26 June 2011). "The end of an era for Zimbabwe's last white farmers?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.
 "Black Africa Leaves China In Quandary". The New York Times. 30 December 1988. Archived from the original on 6 April 2024.
 Vines, Stephen (1 November 2009). "China's black pop idol exposes her nation's racism". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2009.
 "TV talent show exposes China's race issue". CNN. 22 December 2009. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 11 May 2010.
 "Mauritania: Fair elections haunted by racial imbalance". IRIN Africa. 5 March 2007.
 "Arab militia use 'rape camps' for ethnic cleansing of Sudan". The Daily Telegraph. 30 May 2004. Archived from the original on 21 April 2022.
 Racism at root of Sudan's Darfur crisis. Csmonitor.com. 14 July 2004.
 "Niger's Arabs say expulsions will fuel race hate". Reuters Alertnet.org. 25 October 2006. Archived from the original on 10 November 2008.
 "Africa | Niger starts mass Arab expulsions". BBC News. 26 October 2006. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (11 July 2007). "Refworld – The Leader in Refugee Decision Support". UNHCR. Archived from the original on 28 December 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 "Analysis | Indonesia: Why ethnic Chinese are afraid". BBC News. 12 February 1998. Archived from the original on 13 June 2019. Retrieved 23 May 2010.
 "Algeria: Xenophobia against Chinese on the rise in Africa". Afrik.com. 5 August 2009. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010.
 "Rioters attack Chinese after Zambian poll". The Daily Telegraph. 3 October 2006. Archived from the original on 7 April 2024.
 "Lesotho: Anti-Chinese resentment flares". IRIN Africa. 24 January 2008.
 Spiller, Penny (21 April 2006). "Riots highlight Chinese tensions". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 October 2023.
 "Editorial: Racist moves will rebound on Tonga". The New Zealand Herald. 23 November 2001. Archived from the original on 3 May 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2011.
 "Looters shot dead amid chaos of Papua New Guinea's anti-Chinese riots". The Australian. 23 May 2009. Archived from the original on 9 July 2013.
 "Overseas and under siege". The Economist. 11 August 2009. Archived from the original on 9 September 2012.
 Mercer, Phil (12 July 2000). "Future bleak for Fiji's Indians". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 April 2024.
 "Dealing with the dictator". The Australian. 16 April 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2009.
 Fiji Islands: From Immigration to Emigration. Brij V. Lal. The Australian National University.
 "Guyana turns attention to racism". BBC News. 20 September 2005. Archived from the original on 3 April 2024.
 "Racism alive and well in Malaysia". Asia Times. 24 March 2006. Archived from the original on 24 March 2006.
 "Trouble in paradise". BBC News. 1 May 2002.
 "Ethnic strife rocks Madagascar". BBC News. 14 May 2002.
 "Race war rocks Grabouw". Cape Times. 20 March 2012.
 "A Never Ending Policy". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 10 July 2020.
 "Nik Aziz says 'bumiputera' term is racist". 2 March 2009. Archived from the original on 2 March 2009. Retrieved 10 July 2020.
 "Rohingya refugees share stories of sexual violence". Al Jazeera. 29 September 2017.
 Sugrue, Thomas J. (2008). Sweet Land of Liberty: the Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North. New York: Random House. pp. 533–543.
 Massey, Douglas S.; Denton, Nancy A. (1993). American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 "Negative opinions about Roma, Muslims in several European nations". Pew Research Center. 11 July 2016. Archived from the original on 7 December 2023.
 Vesey-Byrne, Joe (22 February 2022). "A map of the most racist countries in Europe". indy100. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020.
 "This map shows what white Europeans associate with race – and it makes for uncomfortable reading". The Conversation. 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 26 May 2024.
 "Black British Voices: the findings". University of Cambridge. 28 September 2023.
 Darwin, Charles (1871). "The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex". John Murray. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 2 December 2007.
 Desmond, Adrian; Moore, James Richard (1991). Darwin. Michael Joseph, Penguin Group. pp. 28, 147, 580. ISBN 978-0-7181-3430-3. OCLC 185764721.
 "Minorities, Race, and Genomics". Retrieved 12 May 2009.
 UNESCO, The Race Question, 1950
 Matsuo Takeshi (University of Shimane, Japan). L'Anthropologie de Georges Vacher de Lapouge: Race, classe et eugénisme (Georges Vacher de Lapouge anthropology) in Studies in French Language and Literature [jp] 2001, n°79, pp. 47–57. ISSN 0425-4929; INIST-CNRS, Cote INIST : 25320, 35400010021625.0050 (Abstract resume on the INIST-CNRS)
 Tucker, William H. (2007). The funding of scientific racism: Wickliffe Draper and the Pioneer Fund. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07463-9.
 Jonassohn, Kurt (December 2000). "On A Neglected Aspect Of Western Racism". Archived from the original on 2 December 2023.
 Blanchard, Pascal; Lemaire, Sandrine & Bancel, Nicolas (August 2000). "Human zoos – Racist theme parks for Europe's colonialists". Le Monde diplomatique. Archived from the original on 19 May 2024.; "Ces zoos humains de la République coloniale" [These human zoos of the Colonial Republic]. Le Monde diplomatique (in French). August 2000.
 Bancel, Nicolas; Blanchard, Pascal; Lemaire, Sandrine (August 2000). "Human Zoos". Le Monde diplomatique. French – free
 Rothfels, Nigel. Savages and Beasts – The Birth of the Modern Zoo. Johns Hopkins University Press. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012.
 "The Colonial Exhibition of May 1931" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 1 August 2006. (96.6 KB) by Michael G. Vann, History Dept., Santa Clara University
 Robert Kurzban; John Tooby & Leda Cosmides (18 December 2001). "Can race be erased? Coalitional computation and social categorization". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 98 (26): 15387–15392. Bibcode:2001PNAS...9815387K. doi:10.1073/pnas.251541498. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 65039. PMID 11742078.. The authors provide a summary and other comments at "(untitled)". Archived from the original on 27 June 2008.
 New Scientist. Issue 2595, 17 March 2007.
 Dawkins, Richard (2006). The selfish gene. Oxford University Press. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-19-929115-1 – via Google Books.
 Hammond, R. A.; Axelrod, R. (2006). "The Evolution of Ethnocentrism". Journal of Conflict Resolution. 50 (6): 926–936. doi:10.1177/0022002706293470. S2CID 9613947.
 Telzer, Eva; Humphreys, Kathryn; Mor, Shapiro; Tottenham, Nim (2013). "Amygdala Sensitivity to Race Is Not Present in Childhood but Emerges over Adolescence". Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 25 (2): 234–244. doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00311. PMC 3628780. PMID 23066731.
 Chekroud, Adam M.; Everett, Jim A.C.; Bridge, Holly; Hewstone, Miles (27 March 2014). "A review of neuroimaging studies of race-related prejudice: does amygdala response reflect threat?". Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 8: 179. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00179. ISSN 1662-5161. PMC 3973920. PMID 24734016.
 Hodson, G.; Busseri, M.A. (5 January 2012). "Bright Minds and Dark Attitudes: Lower Cognitive Ability Predicts Greater Prejudice Through Right-Wing Ideology and Low Intergroup Contact". Psychological Science. 23 (2): 187–195. doi:10.1177/0956797611421206. PMID 22222219. S2CID 206585907.
 Simonovits, Gábor; Kézdi, Gábor; Kardos, Péter (2017). "Seeing the World Through the Other's Eye: An Online Intervention Reducing Ethnic Prejudice". American Political Science Review. 112: 186–193. doi:10.1017/S0003055417000478. ISSN 0003-0554. S2CID 148909505.
 Russel, Edward (2002). The Knights of Bushido. p. 238.; Bix, Herbert (2001). Hirohito and the making of modern Japan. pp. 313–314, 326, 359–360.; Wolferen, Karel van (1989). The Enigma of Japanese Power. pp. 263–272.
 Paulino, Edward (December 2006). "Anti-Haitianism, Historical Memory, and the Potential for Genocidal Violence in the Dominican Republic". Genocide Studies International. 1 (3): 265–288. doi:10.3138/7864-3362-3R24-6231. eISSN 2291-1855. ISSN 2291-1847.
 Høgsbjerg, Christian (18 October 2018). "Trotskyology: A review of John Kelly, Contemporary Trotskyism: Parties, Sects and Social Movements in Britain". International Socialism (160). Archived from the original on 25 May 2024.
 Platt, Edward (20 May 2014). "Comrades at war: the decline and fall of the Socialist Workers Party". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 30 June 2024.
 Ansell, Amy Elizabeth (2013). "Affirmative Action; Color-Consciousness". Race and Ethnicity: The Key Concepts. Routledge. pp. 4, 46. ISBN 978-0-415-33794-6.
 Wida, Erica Chayes (26 June 2020). "What does 'reverse racism' mean and is it actually real? Experts weigh in". Today. Archived from the original on 8 March 2024.
 Newkirk II, Vann R. (5 August 2017). "The Myth of Reverse Racism". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022.
 Massie, Victoria M. "Americans are split on "reverse racism." That still doesn't mean it exists". Vox. p. 29 June 2016. Archived from the original on 5 March 2024.
 Torbett, Emily (21 August 2015). "Reverse racism: Can't exist by definition, insulting to minority groups". The Daily Athenaeum. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2017.
 Ansell, Amy Elizabeth (2013). "Reverse Racism". Race and Ethnicity: The Key Concepts. Routledge. pp. 135–138. ISBN 978-0-415-33794-6.
 Minow, Martha (1985). "Learning to Live with the Dilemma of Difference: Bilingual and Special Education". Law and Contemporary Problems. 48 (2). Duke University School of Law: 157–211. doi:10.2307/1191571. ISSN 0023-9186. JSTOR 1191571.
 Arneson, Richard (8 October 2002). "Equality of Opportunity §2.4 Affirmative Action". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Further reading
Library resources about
Racism
Resources in your library
Allen, Theodore. (1994). The Invention of the White Race: Volume 1 London: Verso Books.
Allen, Theodore. (1997). The Invention of the White Race: Volume 2 London: Verso Books.
Barkan, Elazar (1992), The Retreat of Scientific Racism : Changing Concepts of Race in Britain and the United States between the World Wars, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Barth, Boris: nbn:de:0159-2010092173 Racism , European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: 16 November 2011.
Bolick, Clint (2008). "Racism". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. pp. 411–412. ISBN 978-1412965804. OCLC 750831024.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2018. Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in the United States. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Curta, Florin (2001). The Making of the Slavs: History and Archaeology of the Lower Danube Region, c. 500–700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-42888-0.
Dain, Bruce (2002), A Hideous Monster of the Mind : American Race Theory in the Early Republic, Harvard University Press, Cambridge. (18th century US racial theory)
Daniels, Jessie (1997), White Lies: Race, Class, Gender and Sexuality in White Supremacist Discourse, Routledge, New York.
Daniels, Jessie (2009), Cyber Racism: White Supremacy Online and the New Attack on Civil Rights, Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD.
Ehrenreich, Eric (2007). The Nazi Ancestral Proof: Genealogy, Racial Science, and the Final Solution. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Ewen; Ewen (2006). Typecasting: On the Arts and Sciences of Human Inequality. New York: Seven Stories Press.
Feagin, Joe R. (2006). Systemic Racism: A Theory of Oppression. New York: Routledge.
Feagin, Joe R. (2009). Racist America: Roots, Current Realities, and Future Reparations (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Eliav-Feldon, Miriam; Isaac, Benjamin; Ziegler, Joseph (2009). The Origins of Racism in the West. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibson, Rich (2005) Against Racism and Irrationalism
Graves, Joseph. (2004) The Race Myth NY: Dutton.
Ignatiev, Noel (1995). How the Irish Became White. New York: Routledge.
Isaac, Benjamin (1995). The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lentin, Alana (2008). Racism: A Beginner's Guide. Oxford: One World.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude (1952). Race and History. UNESCO.
Memmi, Albert (2000). Racism. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-3165-0.
Moody-Adams, Michele (2005), "Racism", in Frey, R. G.; Heath Wellman, Christopher (eds.), A companion to applied ethics, Blackwell Companions to Philosophy, Oxford; Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, p. 89–101, doi:10.1002/9780470996621.ch7, ISBN 978-1-4051-3345-6.
Rocchio, Vincent F. (2000). Reel Racism: Confronting Hollywood's Construction of Afro-American Culture. Westview Press.
Smedley, Audrey; Smedley, Brian D. (2005). "Race as Biology if Fiction, Racism as a Social Problem is Real". American Psychologist. 60 (1): 16–26. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.694.7956. doi:10.1037/0003-066x.60.1.16. PMID 15641918.
Smedley, Audrey. 2007. Race in North America: Origins and Evolution of a World View. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Stoler, Ann Laura (1997). "Racial Histories and Their Regimes of Truth". Political Power and Social Theory. 11: 183–206. (historiography of race and racism)
Taguieff, Pierre-André (1987), La Force du préjugé : Essai sur le racisme et ses doubles, Tel Gallimard, La Découverte.
Poliakov, Leon. The Aryan Myth: A History of Racist and Nationalistic Ideas In Europe (Barnes & Noble Books (1996)) ISBN 0-7607-0034-6.
Trepagnier, Barbara. 2006. Silent Racism: How Well-Meaning White People Perpetuate the Racial Divide. Paradigm Publishers.
Twine, France Winddance (1997), Racism in a Racial Democracy: The Maintenance of White Supremacy in Brazil, Rutgers University Press.
UNESCO, The Race Question, 1950
Tali Farkash, "Racists among us" in Y-Net (Yediot Aharonot), "Jewish Scene" section, April 20, 2007
Winant, Howard The New Politics of Race (2004)
Winant, Howard and Omi, Michael Racial Formation in the United States Routeledge (1986); Second Edition (1994).
Bettina Wohlgemuth (2007). Racism in the 21st century: how everybody can make a difference. AV Akademikerverlag GmbH & Company KG. ISBN 978-3-8364-1033-5.
Wright W.D. (1998) "Racism Matters", Westport, CT: Praeger.
External links

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Racism.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Racism.

Look up racism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Being a Black Male in Cuba – By Lucia Lopez, Havana Times 5 May 2009.
Race, history and culture – Ethics – March 1996 Archived 16 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine – Extract of two articles by Claude Lévi-Strauss.
Race, Racism and the Law – Information about race, racism and racial distinctions in the law.
RacismReview Archived 19 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine – Created and maintained by American sociologists Joe Feagin, PhD and Jessie Daniels, PhD, provides a research-based analysis of racism.
The Impact of Racism on Child and Adolescent Health
Links to related articles
vte
Racism
vte
Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap)
vte
Discrimination
vte
International Indigenous and minority rights
vte
Racism in Africa
vte
Racism in the Americas
vte
Racism in Asia
vte
Racism in Europe
vte
Racism in Oceania
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: RacismPrejudice and discrimination by typePolitics and race
This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 12:43 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Racism

148 languages
Add topic



WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Etymology and usage

Biological factors and views

Feminist theory
Gender studies

Psychology and sociology
Gender as biopsychosocial
Gender and society

See also
References
Bibliography
External links
Gender

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For the grammatical concept, see Grammatical gender. For other uses, see Gender (disambiguation).

Gender symbols intertwined: the red Venus symbol (female) and the blue Mars symbol (male)
Gender is the range of social, psychological, cultural, and behavioral aspects of being a man (or boy), woman (or girl), or third gender.[1][2] Although gender often corresponds to sex, a transgender person may identify with a gender other than their sex assigned at birth. Most cultures use a gender binary, in which gender is divided into two categories, and people are considered part of one or the other;[3][4][5] those who are outside these groups may fall under the umbrella term non-binary. Some societies have third genders (and fourth genders, etc.) such as the hijras of South Asia and two-spirit persons native to North America. Most scholars agree that gender is a central characteristic for social organization;[6] this may include social constructs (i.e. gender roles) as well as gender expression.[7][8][9]

The word has been used as a synonym for sex, and the balance between these usages has shifted over time.[10][11][12] In the mid-20th century, a terminological distinction in modern English (known as the sex and gender distinction) between biological sex and gender began to develop in the academic areas of psychology, sociology, sexology, and feminism.[13][14] Before the mid-20th century, it was uncommon to use the word gender to refer to anything but grammatical categories.[7][1] In the West, in the 1970s, feminist theory embraced the concept of a distinction between biological sex and the social construct of gender. The distinction between gender and sex is made by most contemporary social scientists in Western countries,[15][16][17] behavioral scientists and biologists,[18] many legal systems and government bodies,[19] and intergovernmental agencies such as the WHO.[20] The experiences of intersex people also testify to the complexity of sex and gender; female, male, and other gender identities are experienced across the many divergences of sexual difference.[21]

The social sciences have a branch devoted to gender studies. Other sciences, such as psychology, sociology, sexology, and neuroscience, are interested in the subject. The social sciences sometimes approach gender as a social construct, and gender studies particularly does, while research in the natural sciences investigates whether biological differences in females and males influence the development of gender in humans; both inform the debate about how far biological differences influence the formation of gender identity and gendered behavior. Biopsychosocial approaches to gender include biological, psychological, and social/cultural aspects.[22][23]

Etymology and usage
Derivation
The modern English word gender comes from the Middle English gender, gendre, a loanword from Anglo-Norman and Middle French gendre. This, in turn, came from Latin genus. Both words mean "kind", "type", or "sort". They derive ultimately from a Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root *ǵénh₁- 'to beget',[24] which is also the source of kin, kind, king, and many other English words, with cognates widely attested in many Indo-European languages.[25] It appears in Modern French in the word genre (type, kind, also genre sexuel) and is related to the Greek root gen- (to produce), appearing in gene, genesis, and oxygen. The Oxford Etymological Dictionary of the English Language of 1882 defined gender as kind, breed, sex, derived from the Latin ablative case of genus, like genere natus, which refers to birth.[26] The first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED1, Volume 4, 1900) notes the original meaning of gender as "kind" had already become obsolete.

History of the concept
The concept of gender, in the modern social science sense, is a recent invention in human history.[27] The ancient world had no basis of understanding gender as it has been understood in the humanities and social sciences for the past few decades.[27] The term gender had been associated with grammar for most of history and only started to move towards it being a malleable cultural construct in the 1950s and 1960s.[28]

Before the terminological distinction between biological sex and gender as a role developed, it was uncommon to use the word gender to refer to anything but grammatical categories.[7][1] For example, in a bibliography of 12,000 references on marriage and family from 1900 to 1964, the term gender does not even emerge once.[7] Analysis of more than 30 million academic article titles from 1945 to 2001 showed that the uses of the term "gender", were much rarer than uses of "sex", was often used as a grammatical category early in this period. By the end of this period, uses of "gender" outnumbered uses of "sex" in the social sciences, arts, and humanities.[1] It was in the 1970s that feminist scholars adopted the term gender as way of distinguishing "socially constructed" aspects of male–female differences (gender) from "biologically determined" aspects (sex).[1]

As of 2024, many dictionaries list "synonym for 'sex'" as one of gender's meanings, alongside its sociocultural meaning.[12][11] According to the Oxford English Dictionary, gender came into use as a synonym for sex during the twentieth century, initially as a euphemism, as sex was undergoing its own usage shift toward referring to sexual intercourse rather than male/female categories.[10] During the last two decades of the 20th century, gender was often used as a synonym for sex in its non-copulatory senses, especially outside the social sciences. David Haig, writing in 2003, said "the sex/gender distinction is now only fitfully observed."[1] Within the social sciences, however, use of gender in academia increased greatly, outnumbering uses of sex during that same period. In the natural sciences, gender was more often used as a synonym for sex. This can be attributed to the influence of feminism. Haig stated, "Among the reasons that working [natural] scientists have given me for choosing gender rather than sex in biological contexts are desires to signal sympathy with feminist goals, to use a more academic term, or to avoid the connotation of copulation." Haig also notes that "gender" became the preferred term when discussing phenomena for which the social versus biological cause was unknown, disputed, or actually an interaction between the two.[1] In 1993, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) started to use gender instead of sex to avoid confusion with sexual intercourse.[29] Later, in 2011, the FDA reversed its position and began using sex as the biological classification and gender as "a person's self-representation as male or female, or how that person is responded to by social institutions based on the individual's gender presentation."[30]

In legal cases alleging discrimination, a 2006 law review article by Meredith Render notes "as notions of gender and sexuality have evolved over the last few decades, legal theories concerning what it means to discriminate "because of sex" under Title VII have experienced a similar evolution".[31]: 135  In a 1999 law review article proposing a legal definition of sex that "emphasizes gender self-identification," Julie Greenberg writes, "Most legislation utilizes the word 'sex,' yet courts, legislators, and administrative agencies often substitute the word 'gender' for 'sex' when they interpret these statutes."[32]: 270, 274  In J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., a 1994 United States Supreme Court case addressing "whether the Equal Protection Clause forbids intentional discrimination on the basis of gender", the majority opinion noted that with regard to gender, "It is necessary only to acknowledge that 'our Nation has had a long and unfortunate history of sex discrimination,' id., at 684, 93 S.Ct., at 1769, a history which warrants the heightened scrutiny we afford all gender-based classifications today", and stated "When state actors exercise peremptory challenges in reliance on gender stereotypes, they ratify and reinforce prejudicial views of the relative abilities of men and women."[33]

As a grammatical category
The word was still widely used, however, in the specific sense of grammatical gender (the assignment of nouns to categories such as masculine, feminine and neuter). According to Aristotle, this concept was introduced by the Greek philosopher Protagoras.[34]

In 1926, Henry Watson Fowler stated that the definition of the word pertained to this grammar-related meaning:

"Gender...is a grammatical term only. To talk of persons...of the masculine or feminine g[ender], meaning of the male or female sex, is either a jocularity (permissible or not according to context) or a blunder."[35]

As distinct from sex
In 1945, Madison Bentley defined gender as the "socialized obverse of sex".[36][37] Simone de Beauvoir's 1949 book The Second Sex has been interpreted as the beginning of the distinction between sex and gender in feminist theory,[38][39] although this interpretation is contested by many feminist theorists, including Sara Heinämaa.[40][41]

Controversial sexologist John Money coined the term gender role,[42][43] and was the first to use it in print in a scientific trade journal in 1955.[44][45] In the seminal 1955 paper, he defined it as "all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman."[46]

The modern academic sense of the word, in the context of social roles of men and women, dates at least back to 1945,[47] and was popularized and developed by the feminist movement from the 1970s onwards (see feminist theory and gender studies below), which theorizes that human nature is essentially epicene and social distinctions based on sex are arbitrarily constructed. In this context, matters pertaining to this theoretical process of social construction were labelled matters of gender.

The popular use of gender simply as an alternative to sex (as a biological category) is also widespread, although attempts are still made to preserve the distinction. The American Heritage Dictionary (2000) uses the following two sentences to illustrate the difference, noting that the distinction "is useful in principle, but it is by no means widely observed, and considerable variation in usage occurs at all levels."[48]

The effectiveness of the medication appears to depend on the sex (not gender) of the patient.
In peasant societies, gender (not sex) roles are likely to be more clearly defined.

Biological factors and views
See also: Sexual differentiation and Sexual differentiation in humans
Some gendered behavior is influenced by prenatal and early life androgen exposure. This includes, for example, gender normative play, self-identification with a gender, and tendency to engage in aggressive behavior.[49] Males of most mammals, including humans, exhibit more rough and tumble play behavior, which is influenced by maternal testosterone levels. These levels may also influence sexuality, with non-heterosexual persons exhibiting sex atypical behavior in childhood.[50]

Some research pertaining to the biological causes of gender incongruence has been done. Transgender and cisgender gender identity is influenced by genetic factors[51][52] and it has been hypothesised that it may be influenced by the prenatal hormonal environment or sexual dimorphism in the brain.[53][54]

There are studies concerning women who have a condition called congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which leads to the overproduction of the masculine sex hormone, androgen. These women usually have ordinary female appearances (though nearly all girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) have corrective surgery performed on their genitals). However, despite taking hormone-balancing medication given to them at birth, these females are statistically more likely to be interested in activities traditionally linked to males than female activities. Psychology professor and CAH researcher Dr. Sheri Berenbaum attributes these differences to an exposure of higher levels of male sex hormones in utero.[55]

Non-human animals
In non-human animal research, gender is commonly used to refer to the biological sex of the animals.[1] According to biologist Michael J. Ryan, gender identity is a concept exclusively applied to humans.[56] Also, in a letter Ellen Ketterson writes, "[w]hen asked, my colleagues in the Department of Gender Studies agreed that the term gender could be properly applied only to humans, because it involves one's self-concept as man or woman. Sex is a biological concept; gender is a human social and cultural concept."[57] However, Poiani (2010) notes that the question of whether behavioural similarities across species can be associated with gender identity or not is "an issue of no easy resolution",[58] and suggests that mental states, such as gender identity, are more accessible in humans than other species due to their capacity for language.[59] Poiani suggests that the potential number of species with members possessing a gender identity must be limited due to the requirement for self-consciousness.[60]

Jacques Balthazart suggests that "there is no animal model for studying sexual identity. It is impossible to ask an animal, whatever its species, to what sex it belongs."[61] He notes that "this would imply that the animal is aware of its own body and sex, which is far from proved", despite recent research demonstrating sophisticated cognitive skills among non-human primates and other species.[62] Hird (2006) has also stated that whether or not non-human animals consider themselves to be feminine or masculine is a "difficult, if not impossible, question to answer", as this would require "judgements about what constitutes femininity or masculinity in any given species". Nonetheless, she asserts that "non-human animals do experience femininity and masculinity to the extent that any given species' behaviour is gender segregated."[63]

Despite this, Poiani and Dixson emphasise the applicability of the concept of gender role to non-human animals[58] such as rodents[64] throughout their book.[65] The concept of gender role has also been applied to non-human primates such as rhesus monkeys.[66][67]

In 2023, an investigation by Neves et al showed small but important details in communication, such as grammatical genders, in the construction of stereotypes and inherent emotions associated with four non-human animals (Giant panda; giraffe; polar bear; cheetah).[68]

Feminist theory
Part of a series on
Feminist philosophy
female symbol merged with a question mark
Major works
Major thinkers
Ideas
Journals
Category
vte
Biologist and feminist academic Anne Fausto-Sterling rejects the discourse of biological versus social determinism and advocates a deeper analysis of how interactions between the biological being and the social environment influence individuals' capacities.[69]

The philosopher and feminist Simone de Beauvoir applied existentialism to women's experience of life: "One is not born a woman, one becomes one."[70] In context, this is a philosophical statement. However, it may be analyzed in terms of biology—a girl must pass puberty to become a woman—and sociology, as a great deal of mature relating in social contexts is learned rather than instinctive.[71]

Within feminist theory, terminology for gender issues developed over the 1970s. In the 1974 edition of Masculine/Feminine or Human, the author uses "innate gender" and "learned sex roles",[72] but in the 1978 edition, the use of sex and gender is reversed.[73] By 1980, most feminist writings had agreed on using gender only for socioculturally adapted traits.

Andrea Dworkin stated her "commitment to destroying male dominance and gender itself" while stating her belief in radical feminism.[74]

Political scientist Mary Hawkesworth addresses gender and feminist theory, stating that since the 1970s the concept of gender has transformed and been used in significantly different ways within feminist scholarship. She notes that a transition occurred when several feminist scholars, such as Sandra Harding and Joan Scott, began to conceive of gender "as an analytic category within which humans think about and organize their social activity". Feminist scholars in Political Science began employing gender as an analytical category, which highlighted "social and political relations neglected by mainstream accounts". However, Hawkesworth states "feminist political science has not become a dominant paradigm within the discipline".[75]

Gender studies
Gender studies is a field of interdisciplinary study and academic field devoted to gender, gender identity and gendered representation as central categories of analysis. This field includes Women's studies (concerning women, feminity, their gender roles and politics, and feminism), Men's studies (concerning men, masculinity, their gender roles, and politics), and LGBT studies.[76] Sometimes Gender studies is offered together with Study of Sexuality. These disciplines study gender and sexuality in the fields of literature and language, history, political science, sociology, anthropology, cinema and media studies, human development, law, and medicine.[77] It also analyses race, ethnicity, location, nationality, and disability.[78][79]

In gender studies, the term gender refers to proposed social and cultural constructions of masculinities and femininities. In this context, gender explicitly excludes reference to biological differences, to focus on cultural differences.[80] This emerged from a number of different areas: in sociology during the 1950s; from the theories of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan; and in the work of French psychoanalysts like Julia Kristeva, Luce Irigaray, and American feminists such as Judith Butler. Those who followed Butler came to regard gender roles as a practice, sometimes referred to as "performative".[81]

Charles E. Hurst states that some people think sex will, "...automatically determine one's gender demeanor and role (social) as well as one's sexual orientation" (sexual attractions and behavior).[82] Gender sociologists believe that people have cultural origins and habits for dealing with gender. For example, Michael Schwalbe believes that humans must be taught how to act appropriately in their designated gender to fill the role properly, and that the way people behave as masculine or feminine interacts with social expectations. Schwalbe comments that humans "are the results of many people embracing and acting on similar ideas".[83] People do this through everything from clothing and hairstyle to relationship and employment choices. Schwalbe believes that these distinctions are important, because society wants to identify and categorize people as soon as we see them. They need to place people into distinct categories to know how we should feel about them.

Hurst comments that in a society where we present our genders so distinctly, there can often be severe consequences for breaking these cultural norms. Many of these consequences are rooted in discrimination based on sexual orientation. Gays and lesbians are often discriminated against in our legal system because of societal prejudices.[84][85][86] Hurst describes how this discrimination works against people for breaking gender norms, no matter what their sexual orientation is. He says that "courts often confuse sex, gender, and sexual orientation, and confuse them in a way that results in denying the rights not only of gays and lesbians, but also of those who do not present themselves or act in a manner traditionally expected of their sex".[82] This prejudice plays out in our legal system when a person is judged differently because they do not present themselves as the "correct" gender.

American political scientist Karen Beckwith addresses the concept of gender within political science arguing that a "common language of gender" exists and that it must be explicitly articulated in order to build upon it within the political science discipline. Beckwith describes two ways in which the political scientist may employ 'gender' when conducting empirical research: "gender as a category and as a process." Employing gender as a category allows for political scientists "to delineate specific contexts where behaviours, actions, attitudes and preferences considered masculine or feminine result in particular political outcomes". It may also demonstrate how gender differences, not necessarily corresponding precisely with sex, may "constrain or facilitate political" actors. Gender as a process has two central manifestations in political science research, firstly in determining "the differential effects of structures and policies upon men and women," and secondly, the ways in which masculine and feminine political actors "actively work to produce favorable gendered outcomes".[87]

With regard to gender studies, Jacquetta Newman states that although sex is determined biologically, the ways in which people express gender is not. Gendering is a socially constructed process based on culture, though often cultural expectations around women and men have a direct relationship to their biology. Because of this, Newman argues, many privilege sex as being a cause of oppression and ignore other issues like race, ability, poverty, etc. Current gender studies classes seek to move away from that and examine the intersectionality of these factors in determining people's lives. She also points out that other non-Western cultures do not necessarily have the same views of gender and gender roles.[88] Newman also debates the meaning of equality, which is often considered the goal of feminism; she believes that equality is a problematic term because it can mean many different things, such as people being treated identically, differently, or fairly based on their gender. Newman believes this is problematic because there is no unified definition as to what equality means or looks like, and that this can be significantly important in areas like public policy.[89]

Gender identity and gender roles
Main articles: Gender identity and Gender role
Part of a series on
Transgender topics
     
OutlineHistoryTimeline
Gender identities
Health care practices
Rights and legal status
Society and culture
Theory and concepts
By country
See also
 LGBTQ portal Category
vte

Gender depicted as an ambiguous phenomenon, by a young Swedish actor
Gender identity refers to a personal identification with a particular gender and gender role in society. The term woman has historically been used interchangeably with reference to the female body, though more recently this usage has been viewed as controversial by some feminists.[90]

There are qualitative analyses that explore and present the representations of gender; however, feminists challenge these dominant ideologies concerning gender roles and biological sex. One's biological sex is oftentimes tied to specific social roles and expectations. Judith Butler considers the concept of being a woman to have more challenges, owing not only to society's viewing women as a social category but also as a felt sense of self, a culturally conditioned or constructed subjective identity.[91] Social identity refers to the common identification with a collectivity or social category that creates a common culture among participants concerned.[92] According to social identity theory,[93] an important component of the self-concept is derived from memberships in social groups and categories; this is demonstrated by group processes and how inter-group relationships impact significantly on individuals' self perception and behaviors. The groups people belong to therefore provide members with the definition of who they are and how they should behave within their social sphere.[94]


A protester holding a flyer with the words "Gender is like that old jumper from my cousin. It was given to me and it doesn't fit" at a rally for transgender equality in Washington D.C. in 2013
Categorizing males and females into social roles creates a problem for some individuals who feel they have to be at one end of a linear spectrum and must identify themselves as man or woman, rather than being allowed to choose a section in between.[95] Globally, communities interpret biological differences between men and women to create a set of social expectations that define the behaviors that are "appropriate" for men and women and determine their different access to rights, resources, power in society and health behaviors.[96] Although the specific nature and degree of these differences vary from one society to the next, they still tend to typically favor men, creating an imbalance in power and gender inequalities within most societies.[97] Many cultures have different systems of norms and beliefs based on gender, but there is no universal standard to a masculine or feminine role across all cultures.[98] Social roles of men and women in relation to each other is based on the cultural norms of that society, which lead to the creation of gender systems. The gender system is the basis of social patterns in many societies, which include the separation of sexes, and the primacy of masculine norms.[97]

Philosopher Michel Foucault said that as sexual subjects, humans are the object of power, which is not an institution or structure, rather it is a signifier or name attributed to "complex strategical situation".[99] Because of this, "power" is what determines individual attributes, behaviors, etc. and people are a part of an ontologically and epistemologically constructed set of names and labels. For example, being female characterizes one as a woman, and being a woman signifies one as weak, emotional, and irrational, and incapable of actions attributed to a "man". Butler said that gender and sex are more like verbs than nouns. She reasoned that her actions are limited because she is female. "I am not permitted to construct my gender and sex willy-nilly," she said.[91] "[This] is so because gender is politically and therefore socially controlled. Rather than 'woman' being something one is, it is something one does."[91] More recent criticisms of Judith Butler's theories critique her writing for reinforcing the very conventional dichotomies of gender.[100]

Social assignment and gender fluidity
See also: Sex assignment and Gender fluidity
According to gender theorist Kate Bornstein, gender can have ambiguity and fluidity.[101] There are two[102][103] contrasting ideas regarding the definition of gender, and the intersection of both of them is definable as below:

The World Health Organization defines gender as "the characteristics of women, men, girls and boys that are socially constructed".[104] The beliefs, values and attitude taken up and exhibited by them is as per the agreed upon norms of the society and the personal opinion of the person is not taken into the primary consideration of assignment of gender and imposition of gender roles as per the assigned gender.[2]

The assignment of gender involves taking into account the physiological and biological attributes assigned by nature followed by the imposition of the socially constructed conduct. Gender is a term used to exemplify the attributes that a society or culture constitutes as "masculine" or "feminine". Although a person's sex as male or female stands as a biological fact that is identical in any culture, what that specific sex means in reference to a person's gender role as a man or a woman in society varies cross-culturally according to what things are considered to be masculine or feminine.[105] These roles are learned from various, intersecting sources such as parental influences, the socialization a child receives in school, and what is portrayed in the local media. Learning gender roles starts from birth and includes seemingly simple things like what color outfits a baby is clothed in or what toys they are given to play with. However, a person's gender does not always align with what has been assigned at birth. Factors other than learned behaviors play a role in the development of gender.[106]

The article Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited focuses on the work of Heather A. Priess, Sara M. Lindberg, and Janet Shibley Hyde on whether or not girls and boys diverge in their gender identities during adolescent years. The researchers based their work on ideas previously mentioned by Hill and Lynch in their gender intensification hypothesis in that signals and messages from parents determine and affect their children's gender role identities. This hypothesis argues that parents affect their children's gender role identities and that different interactions spent with either parents will affect gender intensification. Priess and among other's study did not support the hypothesis of Hill and Lynch which stated "that as adolescents experience these and other socializing influences, they will become more stereotypical in their gender-role identities and gendered attitudes and behaviors."[107] However, the researchers did state that perhaps the hypothesis Hill and Lynch proposed was true in the past but is not true now due to changes in the population of teens in respect to their gender-role identities.

Authors of "Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations", Cecilia Ridgeway and Shelley Correll, argue that gender is more than an identity or role but is something that is institutionalized through "social relational contexts." Ridgeway and Correll define "social relational contexts" as "any situation in which individuals define themselves in relation to others in order to act."[108] They also point out that in addition to social relational contexts, cultural beliefs plays a role in the gender system. The coauthors argue that daily people are forced to acknowledge and interact with others in ways that are related to gender. Every day, individuals are interacting with each other and comply with society's set standard of hegemonic beliefs, which includes gender roles. They state that society's hegemonic cultural beliefs sets the rules which in turn create the setting for which social relational contexts are to take place. Ridgeway and Correll then shift their topic towards sex categorization. The authors define sex categorization as "the sociocognitive process by which we label another as male or female."[108]

The failure of an attempt to raise David Reimer from infancy through adolescence as a girl after his genitals were accidentally mutilated is cited as disproving the theory that gender identity is determined solely by parenting.[109][110] Reimer's case is used by organizations such as the Intersex Society of North America to caution against needlessly modifying the genitals of unconsenting minors.[111][112] Between the 1960s and 2000, many other male newborns and infants were surgically and socially reassigned as females if they were born with malformed penises, or if they lost their penises in accidents. At the time, surgical reconstruction of the vagina was more advanced than reconstruction of the penis, leading many doctors and psychologists, including John Money who oversaw Reimer's case, to recommend sex reassignment based on the idea that these patients would be happiest living as women with functioning genitalia.[113] Available evidence indicates that in such instances, parents were deeply committed to raising these children as girls and in as gender-typical a manner as possible.[113]: 72–73  A 2005 review of these cases found that about half of natal males reassigned female lived as women in adulthood, including those who knew their medical history, suggesting that gender assignment and related social factors has a major, though not determinative, influence on eventual gender identity.[112]

In 2015, the American Academy of Pediatrics released a webinar series on gender, gender identity, gender expression, transgender, etc.[114][115] In the first lecture Sherer explains that parents' influence (through punishment and reward of behavior) can influence gender expression but not gender identity.[116] Sherer argued that kids will modify their gender expression to seek reward from their parents and society, but this will not affect their gender identity (their internal sense of self).

Societal categories
♀ ♂ ⚥
△ □ ○
Gender symbols

Mary Frith ("Moll Cutpurse") scandalized 17th century society by wearing male clothing, smoking in public, and otherwise defying gender roles.
Sexologist John Money coined the term gender role in 1955. The term gender role is defined as the actions or responses that may reveal their status as boy, man, girl or woman, respectively.[45] Elements surrounding gender roles include clothing, speech patterns, movement, occupations, and other factors not limited to biological sex. In contrast to taxonomic approaches, some feminist philosophers have argued that gender "is a vast orchestration of subtle mediations between oneself and others", rather than a "private cause behind manifest behaviours".[117]

Non-binary and third genders
Main articles: Genderqueer and Third gender
Historically, most societies have recognized only two distinct, broad classes of gender roles, a binary of masculine and feminine, largely corresponding to the biological sexes of male and female.[5][118][119] When a baby is born, society allocates the child to one gender or the other, on the basis of what their genitals resemble.[105]

However, some societies have historically acknowledged and even honored people who fulfill a gender role that exists more in the middle of the continuum between the feminine and masculine polarity. For example, the Hawaiian māhū, who occupy "a place in the middle" between male and female,[120][121] or the Ojibwe ikwekaazo, "men who choose to function as women",[122] or ininiikaazo, "women who function as men".[122] In the language of the sociology of gender, some of these people may be considered third gender, especially by those in gender studies or anthropology. Contemporary Native American and FNIM people who fulfill these traditional roles in their communities may also participate in the modern, two-spirit community,[123] however, these umbrella terms, neologisms, and ways of viewing gender are not necessarily the type of cultural constructs that more traditional members of these communities agree with.[124]

The hijras of India and Pakistan are often cited as third gender.[125][126] Another example may be the muxe (pronounced [ˈmuʃe]), found in the state of Oaxaca, in southern Mexico.[127] The Bugis people of Sulawesi, Indonesia have a tradition that incorporates all the features above.[128]

In addition to these traditionally recognized third genders, many cultures now recognize, to differing degrees, various non-binary gender identities. People who are non-binary (or genderqueer) have gender identities that are not exclusively masculine or feminine. They may identify as having an overlap of gender identities, having two or more genders, having no gender, having a fluctuating gender identity, or being third gender or other-gendered. Recognition of non-binary genders is still somewhat new to mainstream Western culture,[129] and non-binary people may face increased risk of assault, harassment, and discrimination.[130]

Measurement of gender identity
Two instruments incorporating the multidimensional nature of masculinity and femininity have dominated gender identity research: The Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI) and the Personal Attributes Questionnaire (PAQ).[131] Both instruments categorize individuals as either being sex typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits), cross sex-typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits), androgynous (either males or females who report themselves as high on both masculine and feminine traits) or undifferentiated (either males or females who report themselves as low on both masculine and feminine traits).[132] Twenge (1997) noted that men are generally more masculine than women and women generally more feminine than men, but the association between biological sex and masculinity/femininity is waning.[133]

Social construction of sex hypotheses

"Rosie the Riveter" was an iconic symbol of the American homefront in WWII and a departure from restrictive, "feminine", gender roles due to wartime necessity.
Main article: Social construction of sex
The World Health Organization states "As a social construct, gender varies from society to society and can change over time."[134] Sociologists generally regard gender as a social construct. For instance, Ann Oakley, a professor of sociology and social policy, says "the constancy of sex must be admitted, but so also must the variability of gender."[135] Lynda Birke, a feminist biologist, maintains "'biology' is not seen as something which might change."[136]

However, there are scholars who argue that sex is also socially constructed. For example, gender studies writer Judith Butler states that "perhaps this construct called 'sex' is as culturally constructed as gender; indeed, perhaps it was always already gender, with the consequence that the distinction between sex and gender turns out to be no distinction at all."[137]

They continue:

It would make no sense, then, to define gender as the cultural interpretation of sex, if sex is itself a gender-centered category. Gender should not be conceived merely as the cultural inscription of meaning based on a given sex (a juridical conception); gender must also designate the very apparatus of production whereby the sexes themselves are established. [...] This production of sex as the pre-discursive should be understood as the effect of the apparatus of cultural construction designated by gender.[138]

Butler argues that "bodies only appear, only endure, only live within the productive constraints of certain highly gendered regulatory schemas,"[139] and sex is "no longer as a bodily given on which the construct of gender is artificially imposed, but as a cultural norm which governs the materialization of bodies."[140]

With regard to history, Linda Nicholson, a professor of history and women's studies, argues that the understanding of human bodies as sexually dimorphic was historically not recognised. She states that male and female genitals were considered inherently the same in Western society until the 18th century. At that time, female genitals were regarded as incomplete male genitals, and the difference between the two was conceived as a matter of degree. In other words, there was a belief in a gradation of physical forms, or a spectrum.[141] Scholars such as Helen King, Joan Cadden, and Michael Stolberg have criticized this interpretation of history.[142] Cadden notes that the "one-sex" model was disputed even in ancient and medieval medicine,[143] and Stolberg points out that already in the sixteenth century, medicine had begun to move towards a two-sex model.[144]

In addition, drawing from the empirical research of intersex children, Anne Fausto-Sterling, a professor of biology and gender studies, describes how the doctors address the issues of intersexuality. She starts her argument with an example of the birth of an intersexual individual and maintains "our conceptions of the nature of gender difference shape, even as they reflect, the ways we structure our social system and polity; they also shape and reflect our understanding of our physical bodies."[145] Then she adds how gender assumptions affects the scientific study of sex by presenting the research of intersexuals by John Money et al., and she concludes that "they never questioned the fundamental assumption that there are only two sexes, because their goal in studying intersexuals was to find out more about 'normal' development."[146] She also mentions the language the doctors use when they talk with the parents of the intersexuals. After describing how the doctors inform parents about the intersexuality, she asserts that because the doctors believe that the intersexuals are actually male or female, they tell the parents of the intersexuals that it will take a little bit more time for the doctors to determine whether the infant is a boy or a girl. That is to say, the doctors' behavior is formulated by the cultural gender assumption that there are only two sexes. Lastly, she maintains that the differences in the ways in which the medical professionals in different regions treat intersexual people also give us a good example of how sex is socially constructed.[147] In her Sexing the Body: gender politics and the construction of sexuality, she introduces the following example:

A group of physicians from Saudi Arabia recently reported on several cases of XX intersex children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a genetically inherited malfunction of the enzymes that aid in making steroid hormones. [...] In the United States and Europe, such children, because they have the potential to bear children later in life, are usually raised as girls. Saudi doctors trained in this European tradition recommended such a course of action to the Saudi parents of CAH XX children. A number of parents, however, refused to accept the recommendation that their child, initially identified as a son, be raised instead as a daughter. Nor would they accept feminizing surgery for their child. [...] This was essentially an expression of local community attitudes with [...] the preference for male offspring.[148]

Thus it is evident that culture can play a part in assigning gender, particularly in relation to intersex children.[147]

Psychology and sociology
See also: Sex and psychology
Many of the more complicated human behaviors are influenced by both innate factors and by environmental ones, which include everything from genes, gene expression, and body chemistry, through diet and social pressures. A large area of research in behavioral psychology collates evidence in an effort to discover correlations between behavior and various possible antecedents such as genetics, gene regulation, access to food and vitamins, culture, gender, hormones, physical and social development, and physical and social environments.[149]

A core research area within sociology is the way human behavior operates on itself, in other words, how the behavior of one group or individual influences the behavior of other groups or individuals. Starting in the late 20th century, the feminist movement has contributed extensive study of gender and theories about it, notably within sociology but not restricted to it.[150]


The Defence of Saragossa by David Wilkie, 1828. Spain's desperate situation when invaded by Napoleon enabled Agustina de Aragón to break into a closely guarded male preserve and become the only female professional officer in the Spanish Army of her time (and long afterwards).
Social theorists have sought to determine the specific nature of gender in relation to biological sex and sexuality,[151][152] with the result being that culturally established gender and sex have become interchangeable identifications that signify the allocation of a specific 'biological' sex within a categorical gender.[152] The second wave feminist view that gender is socially constructed and hegemonic in all societies, remains current in some literary theoretical circles, Kira Hall and Mary Bucholtz publishing new perspectives as recently as 2008.[153]

As the child grows, "...society provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviors appropriate to the one sex or the other,"[154] which socialises the child into belonging to a culturally specific gender.[155] There is huge incentive for a child to concede to their socialisation with gender shaping the individual's opportunities for education, work, family, sexuality, reproduction, authority,[156] and to make an impact on the production of culture and knowledge.[157] Adults who do not perform these ascribed roles are perceived from this perspective as deviant and improperly socialized.[158]

Some believe society is constructed in a way that splits gender into a dichotomy via social organisations that constantly invent and reproduce cultural images of gender. Joan Acker believed gendering occurs in at least five different interacting social processes:[159]

The construction of divisions along the lines of gender, such as those produced by labor, power, family, the state, even allowed behaviors and locations in physical space
The construction of symbols and images such as language, ideology, dress and the media, that explain, express and reinforce, or sometimes oppose, those divisions
Interactions between men and women, women and women and men and men that involve any form of dominance and submission. Conversational theorists, for example, have studied the way that interruptions, turn taking and the setting of topics re-create gender inequality in the flow of ordinary talk
The way that the preceding three processes help to produce gendered components of individual identity, i.e., the way they create and maintain an image of a gendered self
Gender is implicated in the fundamental, ongoing processes of creating and conceptualising social structures.
Looking at gender through a Foucauldian lens, gender is transfigured into a vehicle for the social division of power. Gender difference is merely a construct of society used to enforce the distinctions made between what is assumed to be female and male, and allow for the domination of masculinity over femininity through the attribution of specific gender-related characteristics.[160] "The idea that men and women are more different from one another than either is from anything else, must come from something other than nature... far from being an expression of natural differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural similarities."[161]

Gender conventions play a large role in attributing masculine and feminine characteristics to a fundamental biological sex.[162] Socio-cultural codes and conventions, the rules by which society functions, and which are both a creation of society as well as a constituting element of it, determine the allocation of these specific traits to the sexes. These traits provide the foundations for the creation of hegemonic gender difference. It follows then, that gender can be assumed as the acquisition and internalisation of social norms. Individuals are therefore socialized through their receipt of society's expectations of 'acceptable' gender attributes that are flaunted within institutions such as the family, the state and the media. Such a notion of 'gender' then becomes naturalized into a person's sense of self or identity, effectively imposing a gendered social category upon a sexed body.[161]

The conception that people are gendered rather than sexed also coincides with Judith Butler's theories of gender performativity. Butler argues that gender is not an expression of what one is, but rather something that one does.[163] It follows then, that if gender is acted out in a repetitive manner it is in fact re-creating and effectively embedding itself within the social consciousness. Contemporary sociological reference to male and female gender roles typically uses masculinities and femininities in the plural rather than singular, suggesting diversity both within cultures as well as across them.

The difference between the sociological and popular definitions of gender involve a different dichotomy and focus. For example, the sociological approach to "gender" (social roles: female versus male) focuses on the difference in (economic/power) position between a male CEO (disregarding the fact that he is heterosexual or homosexual) to female workers in his employ (disregarding whether they are straight or gay). However the popular sexual self-conception approach (self-conception: gay versus straight) focuses on the different self-conceptions and social conceptions of those who are gay/straight, in comparison with those who are straight (disregarding what might be vastly differing economic and power positions between female and male groups in each category). There is then, in relation to definition of and approaches to "gender", a tension between historic feminist sociology and contemporary homosexual sociology.[164]

Gender as biopsychosocial
According to Alex Iantaffi, Meg-John Barker, and others, gender is biopsychosocial. This is because it is derived from biological, psychological, and social factors,[165][22] with all three factors feeding back into each other to form a person's gender.[22]

Biological factors such as sex chromosomes, hormones, and anatomy play a significant role in the development of gender. Hormones such as testosterone and estrogen also play a crucial role in shaping gender identity and expression. Anatomy, including genitalia and reproductive organs, can also influence one's gender identity and expression.[166]

Psychological factors such as cognition, personality, and self-concept also contribute to gender development. Gender identity emerges around the age of two to three years. Gender expression, which refers to the outward manifestation of gender, is influenced by cultural norms, personal preferences, and individual differences in personality.[167]

Social factors such as culture, socialization, and institutional practices shape gender identity and expression.

In some English literature, there is also a trichotomy between biological sex, psychological gender, and social gender role. This framework first appeared in a feminist paper on transsexualism in 1978.[1][168]

Gender and society
Languages
Grammatical gender is a property of some languages in which every noun is assigned a gender, often with no direct relation to its meaning. For example, the word for "girl" is muchacha (grammatically feminine) in Spanish,[169] Mädchen (grammatically neuter) or the older Maid (grammatically feminine)[170] in German, and cailín (grammatically masculine) in Irish.[169]
The term "grammatical gender" is often applied to more complex noun class systems. This is especially true when a noun class system includes masculine and feminine as well as some other non-gender features like animate, edible, manufactured, and so forth. An example of the latter is found in the Dyirbal language. Other gender systems exist with no distinction between masculine and feminine; examples include a distinction between animate and inanimate things, which is common to, amongst others, Ojibwe,[171] Basque and Hittite; and systems distinguishing between people (whether human or divine) and everything else, which are found in the Dravidian languages and Sumerian.
A sample of the World Atlas of Language Structures by Greville G Corbett found that fewer than half of the 258 languages sampled have any system of grammatical gender.[172] Of the remaining languages that feature grammatical gender, over half have more than the minimum requirement of two genders.[172] Grammatical gender may be based on biological sex (which is the most common basis for grammatical gender), animacy, or other features, and may be based on a combination of these classes.[173] One of the four genders of the Dyirbal language consists mainly of fruit and vegetables.[174] Languages of the Niger-Congo language family can have as many as twenty genders, including plants, places, and shapes.[175]
Many languages include terms that are used asymmetrically in reference to men and women. Concern that current language may be biased in favor of men has led some authors in recent times to argue for the use of a more gender-neutral vocabulary in English and other languages.[176]
Several languages attest the use of different vocabulary by men and women, to differing degrees. See, for instance, Gender differences in Japanese. The oldest documented language, Sumerian, records a distinctive sub-language, Emesal, only used by female speakers.[177] Conversely, many Indigenous Australian languages have distinctive registers with a limited lexicon used by men in the presence of their mothers-in-law (see Avoidance speech).[178] As well, quite a few sign languages have a gendered distinction due to boarding schools segregated by gender, such as Irish Sign Language.[179]
Several languages such as Persian[169] or Hungarian are gender-neutral. In Persian the same word is used in reference to men and women. Verbs, adjectives and nouns are not gendered. (See Gender-neutrality in genderless languages).
Several languages employ different ways to refer to people where there are three or more genders, such as Navajo[180]
Legal status
A person's gender can have legal significance. In some countries and jurisdictions there are same-sex marriage laws.[8]

Transgender people
Main article: Legal status of transgender people
The legal status of transgender people varies greatly around the world. Some countries have enacted laws protecting the rights of transgender individuals, but others have criminalized their gender identity or expression.[9] Many countries now legally recognize sex reassignments by permitting a change of legal gender on an individual's birth certificate.[3]

Intersex people
Main article: Legal recognition of intersex people
For intersex people, who according to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, "do not fit typical binary notions of male or female bodies",[181] access to any form of identification document with a gender marker may be an issue.[182] For other intersex people, there may be issues in securing the same rights as other individuals assigned male or female; other intersex people may seek non-binary gender recognition.[183]

Non-binary and third genders
Main article: Legal recognition of non-binary gender
Some countries now legally recognize non-binary or third genders, including Canada, Germany,[184] Australia, New Zealand, India and Pakistan. In the United States, Oregon was the first state to legally recognize non-binary gender in 2017,[4] and was followed by California and the District of Columbia.[6][13]

Science
Historically, science has been portrayed as a masculine pursuit in which women have faced significant barriers to participate.[185] Even after universities began admitting women in the 19th century, women were still largely relegated to certain scientific fields, such as home science, nursing, and child psychology.[186] Women were also typically given tedious, low-paying jobs and denied opportunities for career advancement.[186] This was often justified by the stereotype that women were naturally more suited to jobs that required concentration, patience, and dexterity, rather than creativity, leadership, or intellect.[186] Although these stereotypes have been dispelled in modern times, women are still underrepresented in prestigious "hard science" fields such as physics, and are less likely to hold high-ranking positions,[187] a situation global initiatives such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 are trying to rectify.[188]

See also: Women in science
Religion
Further information: Gender and religion
This topic includes internal and external religious issues such as gender of God and deities creation myths about human gender, roles and rights (for instance, leadership roles especially ordination of women, sex segregation, gender equality, marriage, abortion, homosexuality).


Yin and yang
In Taoism, yin and yang are considered feminine and masculine, respectively. The Taijitu and concept of the Zhou period reach into family and gender relations. Yin is female and yang is male. They fit together as two parts of a whole. The male principle was equated with the sun: active, bright, and shining; the female principle corresponds to the moon: passive, shaded, and reflective. Thus "male toughness was balanced by female gentleness, male action and initiative by female endurance and need for completion, and male leadership by female supportiveness."[189]

In Judaism, God is traditionally described in the masculine, but in the mystical tradition of the Kabbalah, the Shekhinah represents the feminine aspect of God's essence.[190] However, Judaism traditionally holds that God is completely non-corporeal, and thus neither male nor female. Conceptions of the gender of God notwithstanding, traditional Judaism places a strong emphasis on individuals following Judaism's traditional gender roles, though many modern denominations of Judaism strive for greater egalitarianism. Moreover, traditional Jewish culture recognizes at least six genders.[191][192]

In Christianity, God is traditionally described in masculine terms and the Church has historically been described in feminine terms. On the other hand, Christian theology in many churches distinguishes between the masculine images used of God (Father, King, God the Son) and the reality they signify, which transcends gender, embodies all the virtues of both men and women perfectly, which may be seen through the doctrine of Imago Dei. In the New Testament, Jesus at several times mentions the Holy Spirit with the masculine pronoun i.e. John 15:26 among other verses. Hence, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (i.e. Trinity) are all mentioned with the masculine pronoun; though the exact meaning of the masculinity of the Christian triune God is contested.[193]

In Hinduism, one of the several forms of the Hindu god Shiva is Ardhanarishvara (literally half-female god). In this composite form, the left half of the body represents shakti (energy, power) in the form of the goddess Parvati (otherwise his consort) while the right half represents Shiva. Whereas Parvati is regarded to be the cause of arousal of kama (desire), Shiva is the destroyer of the concept. Symbolically, Shiva is pervaded by the power of Parvati and Parvati is pervaded by the power of Shiva.[194]

This myth projects an inherent view in ancient Hinduism, that each human carries within himself both female and male components, which are forces rather than sexes, and it is the harmony between the creative and the annihilative, the strong and the soft, the proactive and the passive, that makes a true person. Evidence of homosexuality, bisexuality, androgyny, multiple sex partners, and open representation of sexual pleasures are found in artworks like the Khajuraho temples, believed to have been accepted within prevalent social frameworks.[195]

Poverty
Main article: Feminization of poverty
Gender inequality is most common in women dealing with poverty. Many women must shoulder all the responsibility of the household because they must take care of the family. Oftentimes this may include tasks such as tilling land, grinding grain, carrying water and cooking.[196] Also, women are more likely to earn low incomes because of gender discrimination, as men are more likely to receive higher pay, have more opportunities, and have overall more political and social capital then women.[197] Approximately 75% of world's women are unable to obtain bank loans because they have unstable jobs.[196] It shows that there are many women in the world's population but only a few represent world's wealth. In many countries, the financial sector largely neglects women even though they play an important role in the economy, as Nena Stoiljkovic pointed out in D+C Development and Cooperation.[198] In 1978 Diana M. Pearce coined the term feminization of poverty to describe the problem of women having higher rates of poverty.[199] Women are more vulnerable to chronic poverty because of gender inequalities in the distribution of income, property ownership, credit, and control over earned income.[200] Resource allocation is typically gender-biased within households, and continue on a higher level regarding state institutions.[200]


A bar graph comparing poverty differences based on age and gender in 2012.
Gender and Development (GAD) is a holistic approach to give aid to countries where gender inequality has a great effect of not improving the social and economic development. It is a program focused on the gender development of women to empower them and decrease the level of inequality between men and women.[201]

The largest discrimination study of the transgender community, conducted in 2013, found that the transgender community is four times more likely to live in extreme poverty (income of less than $10,000 a year) than people who are cisgender.[202][203]

General strain theory
According to general strain theory, studies suggest that gender differences between individuals can lead to externalized anger that may result in violent outbursts.[204] These violent actions related to gender inequality can be measured by comparing violent neighborhoods to non-violent neighborhoods.[204] By noticing the independent variables (neighborhood violence) and the dependent variable (individual violence), it is possible to analyze gender roles.[205] The strain in the general strain theory is the removal of a positive stimulus and or the introduction of a negative stimulus, which would create a negative effect (strain) within individual, which is either inner-directed (depression/guilt) or outer-directed (anger/frustration), which depends on whether the individual blames themselves or their environment.[206] Studies reveal that even though males and females are equally likely to react to a strain with anger, the origin of the anger and their means of coping with it can vary drastically.[206]

Males are likely to put the blame on others for adversity and therefore externalize feelings of anger.[204] Females typically internalize their angers and tend to blame themselves instead.[204] Female internalized anger is accompanied by feelings of guilt, fear, anxiety and depression.[205] Women view anger as a sign that they've somehow lost control, and thus worry that this anger may lead them to harm others and/or damage relationships. On the other end of the spectrum, men are less concerned with damaging relationships and more focused on using anger as a means of affirming their masculinity.[205] According to the general strain theory, men would more likely engage in aggressive behavior directed towards others due to externalized anger whereas women would direct their anger towards themselves rather than others.[206]

Economic development
Gender, and particularly the role of women is widely recognized as vitally important to international development issues.[207] This often means a focus on gender-equality, ensuring participation, but includes an understanding of the different roles and expectation of the genders within the community.[208]

Climate change
Main article: Climate change and gender
Gender is a topic of increasing concern within climate change policy and science.[209] Generally, gender approaches to climate change address gender-differentiated consequences of climate change, as well as unequal adaptation capacities and gendered contribution to climate change. Furthermore, the intersection of climate change and gender raises questions regarding the complex and intersecting power relations arising from it. These differences, however, are mostly not due to biological or physical differences, but are formed by the social, institutional and legal context. Subsequently, vulnerability is less an intrinsic feature of women and girls but rather a product of their marginalization.[210] Roehr[211] notes that, while the United Nations officially committed to gender mainstreaming, in practice gender equality is not reached in the context of climate change policies. This is reflected in the fact that discourses of and negotiations over climate change are mostly dominated by men.[212][213][214] Some feminist scholars hold that the debate on climate change is not only dominated by men but also primarily shaped in 'masculine' principles, which limits discussions about climate change to a perspective that focuses on technical solutions.[213] This perception of climate change hides subjectivity and power relations that actually condition climate-change policy and science, leading to a phenomenon that Tuana[213] terms 'epistemic injustice'. Similarly, MacGregor[212] attests that by framing climate change as an issue of 'hard' natural scientific conduct and natural security, it is kept within the traditional domains of hegemonic masculinity.[212][214]

Social media
Forbes published an article in 2010 that reported 57% of Facebook users are women, which was attributed to the fact that women are more active on social media. On average, women have 8% more friends and account for 62% of posts that are shared via Facebook.[215] Another study in 2010 found that in most Western cultures, women spend more time sending text messages compared to men as well as spending more time on social networking sites as a way to communicate with friends and family.[216]

Research conducted in 2013 found that over 57% of pictures posted on social networking sites were sexual and were created to gain attention.[217] Moreover, 58% of women and 45% of men do not look into the camera, which creates an illusion of withdrawal.[217] Other factors to be considered are the poses in pictures such as women lying down in subordinate positions or even touching themselves in childlike ways.[217]

Adolescent girls generally use social networking sites as a tool to communicate with peers and reinforce existing relationships; boys on the other hand tend to use social networking sites as a tool to meet new friends and acquaintances.[218] Furthermore, social networking sites have allowed individuals to truly express themselves, as they are able to create an identity and socialize with other individuals that can relate.[219] Social networking sites have also given individuals access to create a space where they feel more comfortable about their sexuality.[219] Recent research has indicated that social media is becoming a stronger part of younger individuals' media culture, as more intimate stories are being told via social media and are being intertwined with gender, sexuality, and relationships.[219]

Research has found that almost all U.S. teens (95%) aged 12 through 17 are online, compared to only 78% of adults. Of these teens, 80% have profiles on social media sites, as compared to only 64% of the online population aged 30 and older. According to a study conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, 11-to-18-year-olds spend on average over one and a half hours a day using a computer and 27 minutes per day visiting social network sites, i.e. the latter accounts for about one fourth of their daily computer use.[220]

Studies have shown that female users tend to post more "cute" pictures, while male participants were more likely to post pictures of themselves in activities. Women in the U.S. also tend to post more pictures of friends, while men tend to post more about sports and humorous links. The study also found that males would post more alcohol and sexual references.[220] The roles were reversed however, when looking at a teenage dating site: women made sexual references significantly more often than males. Boys share more personal information, while girls are more conservative about the personal information they post. Boys, meanwhile, are more likely to orient towards technology, sports, and humor in the information they post to their profile.[221]

Research in the 1990s suggested that different genders display certain traits, such as being active, attractive, dependent, dominant, independent, sentimental, sexy, and submissive, in online interaction.[222] Even though these traits continue to be displayed through gender stereotypes, recent studies show that this is not necessarily the case any more.[223]

See also
Androcentrism
Anti-gender movement
Biological determinism
Coloniality of gender
Feminist metaphysics
Gender and politics
Gender bender
Gender paradox
Gynocentrism
Postgenderism
Sex–gender distinction
Sexism
Sex ratio
References
 Haig, David (April 2004). "The Inexorable Rise of Gender and the Decline of Sex: Social Change in Academic Titles, 1945–2001" (PDF). Archives of Sexual Behavior. 33 (2): 87–96. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.359.9143. doi:10.1023/B:ASEB.0000014323.56281.0d. PMID 15146141. S2CID 7005542. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2012.
 "What do we mean by "sex" and "gender"?". World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 30 January 2017. Retrieved 26 November 2015.
 Sigelman, Carol K.; Rider, Elizabeth A. (2017). Life-Span Human Development. Cengage Learning. p. 385. ISBN 978-1-337-51606-8. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2021.
 Maddux, James E.; Winstead, Barbara A. (2019). Psychopathology: Foundations for a Contemporary Understanding. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-64787-1. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2021.
 Kevin L. Nadal, The Sage Encyclopedia of Psychology and Gender (2017, ISBN 1483384276), p. 401: "Most cultures currently construct their societies based on the understanding of gender binary—the two gender categorizations (male and female). Such societies divide their population based on biological sex assigned to individuals at birth to begin the process of gender socialization."
 Heinemann, Isabel (2012). Inventing the Modern American Family: Family Values and Social Change in 20th Century United States. Campus Verlag. p. 36. ISBN 978-3-593-39640-8. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 28 July 2021.
 Udry, J. Richard (November 1994). "The Nature of Gender" (PDF). Demography. 31 (4): 561–573. doi:10.2307/2061790. JSTOR 2061790. PMID 7890091. S2CID 38476067. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 June 2021.
 Lindqvist, Anna; Sendén, Marie Gustafsson; Renström, Emma A. (2 October 2021). "What is gender, anyway: a review of the options for operationalising gender". Psychology & Sexuality. 12 (4): 332–344. doi:10.1080/19419899.2020.1729844. S2CID 213397968.
 Bates, Nancy; Chin, Marshall; Becker, Tara, eds. (2022). Measuring Sex, Gender Identity, and Sexual Orientation. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/26424. ISBN 978-0-309-27510-1. PMID 35286054. S2CID 247432505. Archived from the original on 24 May 2023.
 "Gender". Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved 11 August 2024.
 "gender". Cambridge English Dictionary. Retrieved 9 August 2024.
 "gender". American Heritage Dictionary. Retrieved 9 August 2024.
 Hausman, Bernice (1995). Changing Sex: Transsexualism, Technology, and the Idea of Gender. United Kingdom: Duke University Press. p. 95. ISBN 0822316927.
 Germon, J. (2009). "Money and the Production of Gender". Gender. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 23–62. doi:10.1057/9780230101814_2. ISBN 978-1-349-37508-0.
 Kimmel, Michael S. (2017). The gendered society (Sixth ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-19-026031-6. OCLC 949553050.
 "GENDER". Social Science Dictionary. Archived from the original on 2 February 2011. Retrieved 20 March 2015.
 Lindsey, Linda L. (2010). "Ch. 1. The Sociology of gender" (PDF). Gender Roles: A Sociological Perspective. Pearson. ISBN 978-0-13-244830-7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2015.
 Paludi, Michele Antoinette (2008). The Psychology of Women at Work: Challenges and Solutions for Our Female Workforce. ABC-CLIO. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-275-99677-2. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021.
 O'Halloran, Kerry (2020). Sexual orientation, gender identity and international human rights law: common law perspectives. London: Routledge. pp. 22–28, 328–329. ISBN 978-0-429-44265-0. OCLC 1110674742.
 "Gender: definitions". www.euro.who.int. Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2021.
 Schweizer, Katinka; Brunner, Franziska; Handford, Christina; Richter-Appelt, Hertha (2 January 2014). "Gender experience and satisfaction with gender allocation in adults with diverse intersex conditions (divergences of sex development, DSD)". Psychology & Sexuality. 5 (1): 56–82. doi:10.1080/19419899.2013.831216.
 Iantaffi, Alex (2017). How to Understand Your Gender: A Practical Guide for Exploring Who You Are. Jessica Kingsley Publishers. ISBN 978-1785927461.
 Knudson-Martin, Carmen; Mahoney, Anne Rankin (March 2009). "Introduction to the Special Section-Gendered Power in Cultural Contexts: Capturing the Lived Experience of Couples". Family Process. 48 (1): 5–8. doi:10.1111/j.1545-5300.2009.01263.x. PMID 19378641.
 Ringe, Don (2006). From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic (PDF). A Linguistic History of English (1st ed.). New York City: Oxford University Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-19-928413-9. OCLC 64554645. OL 7405151M. Wikidata Q131605459. Retrieved 16 October 2021.
 'Gen' Archived 19 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Your Dictionary.com
 Skeat, Walter William (1882). An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 230.
 Holmes, Brooke (2012). "Introduction". Gender: Antiquity and its Legacy. Oxford University Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0195380828. For as it turns out, what we call gender is a fairly recent concept. It's not that people in Ancient Greece and Rome didn't talk and think and argue about the categories of male and female, masculine and feminine and the nature and extent of sexual difference. They did in [ways] both similar to and very different from our own. The problem is that they didn't have the concept of gender that has grown so influential in the humanities and the social sciences over the past four decades.
 Holmes, Brooke (2012). "Introduction". Gender: Antiquity and its Legacy. Oxford University Press. pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-0195380828. The concept of gender, as I've just said, is recent. So what is it and where does it come from? Simone de Beauvoir famously wrote: 'one is not born, but rather becomes, woman'...But the term 'gender', which had long been associated with grammar, only started to move towards what she was describing in the later 1950s and 1960s.
 "Guideline for the Study and Evaluation of Gender Differences in the Clinical Evaluation of Drugs" (PDF). Food and Drug Administration. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2015. Retrieved 3 August 2014.
 "Evaluation of Sex-Specific Data in Medical Device Clinical Studies – Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff". U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 22 August 2014. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 26 February 2019.
 Render, Meredith (December 2006). "Misogyny, Androgyny and Sexual Harassment: Sex Discrimination in a Gender-Deconstructed World". Harvard Journal of Law & Gender. 29: 99–150. Retrieved 24 December 2022.
 Greenberg, Julie A (1999). "Defining Male and Female: Intersexuality and the Collision Between Law and Biology". Arizona Law Review. 41: 265–328. SSRN 896307.
 "J.E.B., Petitioner v. ALABAMA ex rel. T.B." Legal Information Institute. Cornell Law School. Retrieved 24 December 2022.
 Aristotle (1954), Rhetoric, translated by Roberts, William Rhys, Mineola, NY: Dover, p. 127, ISBN 978-0-486-43793-4, OCLC 55616891, A fourth rule is to observe Protagoras' classification of nouns into male, female and inanimate.
 Fowler's Modern English Usage, 1926: p. 211.
 Bentley, Madison (April 1945). "Sanity and Hazard in Childhood". The American Journal of Psychology. 58 (2): 212–246. doi:10.2307/1417846. ISSN 0002-9556. JSTOR 1417846. Retrieved 17 August 2021.
 Horley, James; Clarke, Jan (2016). Experience, Meaning, and Identity in Sexuality: A Psychosocial Theory of Sexual Stability and Change. Springer. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-137-40096-3. Archived from the original on 17 August 2021. Retrieved 17 August 2021.
 Witt, Charlotte E. (2011). Feminist metaphysics: explorations in the ontology of sex, gender and identity. Springer. p. 48. ISBN 978-90-481-3782-4. OCLC 780208834. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 6 September 2021.
 Butler, Judith, "Sex and Gender in Simone de Beauvoir's Second Sex" in Yale French Studies, No. 72 (1986), pp. 35–49.
 Heinämaa, Sara (1997). "What Is a Woman? Butler and Beauvoir on the Foundations of the Sexual Difference". Hypatia. 12 (1): 20–39. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.1997.tb00169.x. S2CID 143621442. Retrieved 8 February 2023.
 Viveros Vigoya, Mara (2016). Disch, Lisa; Hawkesworth, Mary (eds.). "Sex/Gender". academic.oup.com. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199328581.013.42. ISBN 978-0-19-932858-1. Retrieved 24 December 2023.
 Brewington, Kelly (2006). "Hopkins pioneer in gender identity". Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on 13 April 2010. Retrieved 7 April 2023.
 Goldie, Professor Department of English Terry; Goldie, Terry (2014). The Man Who Invented Gender: Engaging the Ideas of John Money. UBC Press. ISBN 978-0-7748-2794-2.
 Money, J. (1994). "The concept of gender identity disorder in childhood and adolescence after 39 years". Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy. 20 (3): 163–177. doi:10.1080/00926239408403428. ISSN 0092-623X. PMID 7996589.
 Drescher, Jack (31 March 2010). "Transsexualism, Gender Identity Disorder and the DSM". Journal of Gay & Lesbian Mental Health. 14 (2): 109–122. doi:10.1080/19359701003589637. ISSN 1935-9705.
 Money, John; Hampson, Joan G; Hampson, John (October 1955). "An Examination of Some Basic Sexual Concepts: The Evidence of Human Hermaphroditism". Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 97 (4): 301–19. PMID 13260820. By the term, gender role, we mean all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman, respectively. It includes, but is not restricted to sexuality in the sense of eroticism. Gender role is appraised in relation to the following: general mannerisms, deportment and demeanor, play preferences and recreational interests; spontaneous topics of talk in unprompted conversation and casual comment; content of dreams, daydreams, and fantasies; replies to oblique inquiries and projective tests; evidence of erotic practices and, finally, the person's own replies to direct inquiry.
 "gender, n." Oxford English Dictionary Online. Oxford English Dictionary. p. Sense 3(b). Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2017.
 Usage note: Gender, Archived 21 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition, (2000).
 Hines, Melissa; Constantinescu, Mihaela; Spencer, Debra (26 February 2015). "Early androgen exposure and human gender development". Biology of Sex Differences. 6: 3. doi:10.1186/s13293-015-0022-1. ISSN 2042-6410. PMC 4350266. PMID 25745554.
 Hines, Melissa (6 February 2017). "Prenatal endocrine influences on sexual orientation and on sexually differentiated childhood behavior". Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. 32 (2): 170–182. doi:10.1016/j.yfrne.2011.02.006. ISSN 0091-3022. PMC 3296090. PMID 21333673.
 Polderman, Tinca J. C.; Kreukels, Baudewijntje P. C.; Irwig, Michael S.; Beach, Lauren; Chan, Yee-Ming; Derks, Eske M.; Esteva, Isabel; Ehrenfeld, Jesse; Heijer, Martin Den; Posthuma, Danielle; Raynor, Lewis; Tishelman, Amy; Davis, Lea K. (March 2018). "The Biological Contributions to Gender Identity and Gender Diversity: Bringing Data to the Table". Behavior Genetics. 48 (2): 95–108. doi:10.1007/s10519-018-9889-z. hdl:1871.1/acbbef10-1339-495d-8cc6-0d3f02742596. ISSN 1573-3297. PMID 29460079. Retrieved 15 December 2024.
 Ristori, Jiska; Cocchetti, Carlotta; Romani, Alessia; Mazzoli, Francesca; Vignozzi, Linda; Maggi, Mario; Fisher, Alessandra Daphne (January 2020). "Brain Sex Differences Related to Gender Identity Development: Genes or Hormones?". International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 21 (6): 2123. doi:10.3390/ijms21062123. ISSN 1422-0067. PMC 7139786. PMID 32204531.
 Ettner, Randi (2020). "Etiology of Gender Dysphoria". Gender Confirmation Surgery. Springer International Publishing. pp. 21–28. ISBN 978-3-030-29092-4. Retrieved 9 December 2024.
 Fisher, Alessandra D.; Ristori, Jiska; Morelli, Girolamo; Maggi, Mario (15 May 2018). "The molecular mechanisms of sexual orientation and gender identity". Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology. 467: 3–13. doi:10.1016/j.mce.2017.08.008. PMID 28847741.
 Beattie-Moss, Melissa (8 June 2005). "Are gender differences predetermined?". Penn State University. Archived from the original on 13 January 2006. Retrieved 30 August 2010.
 Ryan, Michael J. (2019). A Taste for the Beautiful: The Evolution of Attraction. Princeton University Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-691-19139-3. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2021.
 Ketterson, Ellen D. (2005). "Evolution's Rainbow: Diversity, Gender, and Sexuality in Nature and People". BioScience. 55 (2): 178. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2005)055[0178:dahg]2.0.co;2. ISSN 0006-3568.
 Poiani 2010, p. 2.
 Poiani, Aldo (2010). Animal homosexuality: a biosocial perspective. A. F. Dixson. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-511-78958-8. OCLC 665835558. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2021.
 Poiani 2010, p. 36.
 Balthazart, Jacques (2012). The Biology of Homosexuality. Oxford University Press, US. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-19-983882-0. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2021.
 Balthazart 2012.
 Hird, Myra J. (2006). "Animal Transex". Australian Feminist Studies. 21 (49): 35–50. doi:10.1080/08164640500470636. ISSN 0816-4649. S2CID 214614711. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2021.
 Poiani 2010, p. 141,164.
 Poiani 2010, p. 20,105,110.
 Einstein, Gillian, ed. (2007). Sex and the brain. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-262-27224-7. OCLC 181029707. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2021. While the exact forms of play that characterize prepubertal male humans and prepubertal male rhesus may not be identical, both of these primates show a clear division of preadolescent activities into gender roles.
 Goy, Robert W.; Uno, Hideo; Sholl, Samuel A. (14 April 2020), "Psychological and Anatomical Consequences of Prenatal Exposure to Androgens in Female Rhesus*", Toxicity of Hormones in Perinatal Life, CRC Press, pp. 127–142, doi:10.1201/9780429283116-9, ISBN 978-0429283116, S2CID 81167171, archived from the original on 17 February 2022, retrieved 8 September 2021
 "Can Gender Nouns Influence the Stereotypes of Animals? - PMC". web.archive.org. 25 May 2025. Retrieved 25 May 2025.
 Anne Fausto-Sterling (1992) Myths of Gender: Biological Theories about Men and Women. New York: Basic Books. p. 8 ISBN 0-465-04792-0.
 de Beauvoir, Simone (1949) The Second Sex.
 Fausto-Sterling (2000) Chapter 3 "Of Gender and Genitals", pp. 44–77
 Chafetz, J.S. (1974). Masculine/Feminine or Human? An Overview of the Sociology of Sex Roles. Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock.
 Chafetz, J.S. (1978). Masculine/Feminine or Human? An Overview of the Sociology of Sex Roles. Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock. ISBN 978-0-87581-231-1. OCLC 4348310.
 Dworkin, Andrea (1995). "My Life as a Writer", pp. 33–34 in Dworkin, Andrea Life and Death: Unapologetic Writings on the Continuing War Against Women. New York: Free Press. ISBN 0-7432-3626-2
 Hawkesworth, Mary (2005). "Engendering political science: An immodest proposal". Politics & Gender. 1 (1): 141–156. doi:10.1017/s1743923x0523101x (inactive 1 November 2024). S2CID 146467636.
 "Gender Studies". Whitman College. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "About – Center for the Study of Gender and Sexuality (CSGS)". The University of Chicago. Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "Department of Gender Studies". Indiana University (IU Bloomington). Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 Healey, J.F. (2003). Race, Ethnicity, Gender and Class: the Sociology of Group Conflict and Change, Pine Forge Press ISBN 1-4129-1521-X
 Garrett, Stephanie (1992). Gender Archived 11 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Routledge, p. vii ISBN 0-422-60570-0.
 Butler (1990) p. 9.
 Hurst, C. (2007) Social Inequality: Forms, Causes, and Consequences. 6th ed. pp. 131, 139–142
 Schwalbe, M. (2005). The Sociologically Examined Life: Pieces of the Conversation Third Edition. pp. 22–23 ISBN 0-07-282579-0
 Smith, N. and Stanley, E. (2011). Captive Genders. 1st ed. Edinburgh: AK Press.
 Center for American Progress, (2016). Unjust: How The Broken Criminal Justice System Fails LGBT People. Washington.
 Lydon et al., "Coming Out of Concrete Closets: A Report on Black & Pink's National LGBTQ Prisoner Survey."
 Karen, Beckwith (2005). "A Common Language of Gender?". Politics & Gender. 1 (1): 132. doi:10.1017/s1743923x05211017 (inactive 1 November 2024). S2CID 146644541.
 White, Linda (1964). Women, Politics, and Public Policy: The Political Struggles of Canadian Women, 2nd ed. Oxford Press. pp. 6–7.
 White, Linda (1964). Women, Politics, and Public Policy: The Political Struggles of Canadian Women, 2nd ed. Oxford Press. pp. 11–12.
 Mikkola, Mari (12 May 2008). "Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender." Archived 25 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine Stanford University.
 Butler (1990)
 Snow, D.A. and Oliver, P.E. (1995). "Social Movements and Collective Behavior: Social Psychological Dimensions and Considerations", pp. 571–600 in Karen Cook, Gary A. Fine, and James S.House (eds.) Sociological Perspectives on Social Psychology. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
 Taifel, H. & Turner, J.C. (1986). "The social identity of intergroup relations", pp. 7–24 in S. Worchel & W.G. Austin (eds.) The psychology of intergroup relations. Chicago: Nelson-Hall. ISBN 0-8185-0278-9.
 Terry, D.J.; Hogg, M.A. (1996). "Group norms and the attitude-behavior relationship: A role for group identification". Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 22 (8): 776–793. doi:10.1177/0146167296228002. S2CID 145426706.
 Pathak, Sunita, and Pathak, Surendra "Gender and the MDGs with Reference to Women as Human" Archived 25 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Academia.edu.
 Galdas, P. M.; Johnson, J. L.; Percy, M.E.; Ratner, P.A. (2010). "Help seeking for cardiac symptoms: Beyond the masculine–feminine binary". Social Science & Medicine. 71 (1): 18–24. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.03.006. PMC 5142841. PMID 20398989.
 Warnecke, T. (2013). "Entrepreneurship and Gender: An Institutional Perspective". Journal of Economic Issues. 47 (2): 455–464. doi:10.2753/JEI0021-3624470219. S2CID 153502466.
 Spade, J., Valentine, C. (2011). The kaleidoscope of gender: prisms, patterns, and possibilities. Pine Forge Press. 3rd edition
 Tong, Rosemarie (2009). Feminist thought: a more comprehensive introduction / Rosemarie Tong. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press ISBN 0-8133-4375-5.
 Vigo, Julian. 'The Body in Gender Discourse: The Fragmentary Space of the Feminine.' La femme et l'écriture. Meknès, Maroc, 1996.
 Bornstein, Kate (1995). Gender Outlaw – On Men, Women and the rest of us, Vintage, ISBN 0-679-75701-5 pp. 51–52
 "What Is Fluid?". WebMD. 28 June 2021. Retrieved 23 June 2022. Reviewed by Dan Brennan
 Zheng, Lily (20 November 2020). "Transgender, Gender-Fluid, Nonbinary, and Gender-Nonconforming Employees Deserve Better Policies". Harvard Business Review. ISSN 0017-8012. Retrieved 23 June 2022.
 "Gender". World Health Organization. Retrieved 8 February 2023.
 Birke, Lynda (2001). "Chapter 24, In Pursuit of Difference." The Gender and Science Reader. New York: Routledge, pp. 309–322.
 Ehrensaft, Diane (25 May 2017). "Gender nonconforming youth: current perspectives". Adolescent Health, Medicine and Therapeutics. 8: 57–67. doi:10.2147/ahmt.s110859. ISSN 1179-318X. PMC 5448699. PMID 28579848.
 Priess, Heather A.; Lindberg, Sara M.; Hyde, Janet Shibley (2009). "Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited". Child Development. 80 (5): 1531–1544. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01349.x. JSTOR 25592088. PMC 4244905. PMID 19765016.
 Ridgeway, Cecilia L.; Correll, Shelley J. (2004). "Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations". Gender. 18 (4): 510–531. doi:10.1177/0891243204265269. JSTOR 4149448. S2CID 8797797.
 "David Reimer, subject of 'sex reassignment,' dead at 38". Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
 Colapinto J (2001). As Nature Made Him: The Boy Who Was Raised as a Girl. Harper Perennial. ISBN 0-06-092959-6. Revised in 2006[page needed]
 Intersex Society of North America | A world free of shame, secrecy, and unwanted genital surgery
 Meyer-Bahlburg, Heino F. L. (1 August 2005). "Gender Identity Outcome in Female-Raised 46,XY Persons with Penile Agenesis, Cloacal Exstrophy of the Bladder, or Penile Ablation". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 34 (4): 423–438. doi:10.1007/s10508-005-4342-9. ISSN 1573-2800. PMID 16010465. S2CID 34971769.
 Bailey JM, Vasey PL, Diamond LM, Breedlove SM, Vilain E, Epprecht M (September 2016). "Sexual Orientation, Controversy, and Science". Psychological Science in the Public Interest. 17 (2): 45–101. doi:10.1177/1529100616637616. PMID 27113562. S2CID 42281410.
 "American Academy of Pediatrics, Education, LGBT Health and Wellness". www.aap.org. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017.
 "American Academy of Pediatrics Webinar Series – What is Gender?" (PDF). American Academy of Pediatrics. 11 September 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 17 February 2022.
 Dr. Sherer (15 September 2015). "SOLGBTHW Webinar – What is Gender Terminology and Definitions". American Academy of Pediatrics. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019.
 Laurie, Timothy (2014). "The Ethics of Nobody I Know: Gender and the Politics of Description". Qualitative Research Journal. 14 (1): 64–78. doi:10.1108/qrj-03-2014-0011. hdl:10453/44221. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
 Maria Llorente, Culture, Heritage, and Diversity in Older Adult Mental Health Care (2018, ISBN 1615372059), p. 184: "Historically, in many, if not most, cultures, gender traditionally has been conceived as binary, but the modern and preferred understanding is that gender actually occurs on a spectrum."
 Marie L. Miville, Angela D. Ferguson, Handbook of Race-Ethnicity and Gender in Psychology (2014, ISBN 1461488605), p. 47: "In Western societies, as in many regions of the world, gender has been historically conceptualized and constructed as a binary (being either "male" or "female") largely determined by both biological (genetic and hormonal) and social cognitive (social, cultural reinforcement, and modeling of gendered behaviour)."
 "Hinaleimoana Wong-Kalu – TedxMaui". 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 May 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2022.
 "Intersections: Transgender, Queens, Mahu, Whatever': An Oral History from Hawai'i". Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2022.
 Treuer, Anton (2011). "Women and Gender". The Assassination of Hole in the Day. Borealis Books. ISBN 978-0873518017. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 17 October 2016.
 Gilbert Herdt, ed. (1996). Third Sex Third Gender: Beyond Sexual Dimorphism in Culture and History. Zone Books. ISBN 978-0-942299-82-3. OCLC 35293440.
 Kehoe, Alice B. (2002). "Appropriate Terms". SAA Bulletin. Society for American Archaeology 16(2), UC-Santa Barbara. ISSN 0741-5672. Archived from the original on 5 November 2004. Retrieved 1 May 2019. At the conferences that produced the book, Two-Spirited People, I heard several First Nations people describe themselves as very much unitary, neither "male" nor "female," much less a pair in one body. Nor did they report an assumption of duality within one body as a common concept within reservation communities; rather, people confided dismay at the Western proclivity for dichotomies. Outside Indo-European-speaking societies, "gender" would not be relevant to the social personae glosses "men" and "women," and "third gender" likely would be meaningless. The unsavory word "berdache" certainly ought to be ditched (Jacobs et al. 1997:3–5), but the urban American neologism "two-spirit" can be misleading.
 Nanda, Serena (1998). Neither Man Nor Woman: The Hijras of India. Wadsworth Publishing. ISBN 0-534-50903-7
 Reddy, Gayatri (2005). With Respect to Sex: Negotiating Hijra Identity in South India. (Worlds of Desire: The Chicago Series on Sexuality, Gender, and Culture), University of Chicago Press (2005). ISBN 0-226-70756-3
 "A lifestyle distinct: the Muxe of Mexico," Archived 24 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine New York Times, 6 December 2008.
 Graham, Sharyn (April–June 2001) Sulawesi's Fifth Gender Archived 18 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine. Inside Indonesia.
 McGee, R. Jon and Richard L. Warms (2011). Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History. New York, McGraw Hill.
 Jack Harrison; Jaime Grant; Jody L. Herman (2011–2012). "A Gender Not Listed Here: Genderqueers, Gender Rebels, and Otherwise in the National Transgender Discrimination Survey" (PDF). LGBTQ Policy Journal. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2017.
 Stets, Jan E.; Kushida, Melanie; Fares, Phoenicia; Whitham, Monica M. (26 August 2023). "Exploring Current Gender Meanings: Creating a New Gender Identity Scale". Advancing Identity Theory, Measurement, and Research. Frontiers in Sociology and Social Research. Vol. 10. Springer Publishing. pp. 79–107. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-32986-9_5. ISBN 978-3-031-32985-2.
 Palan, K. (2001). "Gender Identity in Consumer Research: A Literature Review and Research Agenda" (PDF). Academy of Marketing Science Review. 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 September 2012.
 Twenge, Jean M. (1997). "Changes in masculine and feminine traits over time: A meta-analysis". Sex Roles. 36 (5–6): 305–325. doi:10.1007/BF02766650. S2CID 144858334.
 "Gender and health". World Health Organization. Retrieved 7 April 2023.
 Oakley, Ann (1972). Sex, Gender and Society. London: Temple Smith. p. 16 ISBN 0-85117-020-X.
 Birke, Lynda (2001). "In Pursuit of Difference: Scientific Studies of Women and Men," Muriel Lederman and Ingrid Bartsch eds., The Gender and Science Reader, New York: Routledge. p. 320.
 Butler (1990) p. 7.
 Butler (1990) p. 10.
 Butler (1993) p. xi.
 Butler (1993) pp. 2–3.
 Nicholson, Linda (1994). ""Interpreting Gender". Signs". Journal of Women in Culture and Society. 20 (1): 79–105. doi:10.1086/494955. JSTOR 3174928. S2CID 225085688.
 Helen King. 2013. The One-Sex Body on Trial: The Classical and Early Modern Evidence. Farnham: Ashgate. 978-1-4094-6335-1
 Joan Cadden. 1993. Meanings of Sex Difference in the Middle Ages: Medicine, Science, and Culture. Cambridge University Press.
 Michael Stolberg. 2003. "A Woman Down to her Bones. The Anatomy of Sexual Difference in the Sixteenth and Early Seventeenth Centuries." Isis, 94: 274-299.
 Fausto-Sterling (2000) p. 45.
 Fausto-Sterling (2000) p. 46.
 Fausto-Sterling (2000)
 Fausto-Sterling (2000) pp. 58–59.
 Landecker, Hannah; Panofsky, Aaron (30 July 2013). "From Social Structure to Gene Regulation, and Back: A Critical Introduction to Environmental Epigenetics for Sociology". Annual Review of Sociology. 39 (1): 333–357. doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-071312-145707. ISSN 0360-0572.
 England, Paula (May 1998). "The Impact of Feminist Thought on Sociology" (PDF). Contemporary Sociology. 28 (3): 263–268. doi:10.2307/2654137. JSTOR 2654137. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2021.
 Little, William (6 November 2014). "Chapter 12. Gender, Sex, and Sexuality". Introduction to Sociology.
 Mayer, Lawrence S.; McHugh, Paul R. (2016). "Sexuality and Gender: Findings from the Biological, Psychological, and Social Sciences". The New Atlantis (50): 10–143. ISSN 1543-1215. JSTOR 43893424.
 Gender Articulated. Routledge. 1995. ISBN 978-0-415-91399-7. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2008.
 Connell, R. (1987) Gender & Power. Polity Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-8047-1430-4.
 Ogli, Burxonov Baxodirjon Botirali (2020). "Gender Can Vary Across Related Languages". JournalNX (in Ukrainian). 6 (11): 416–418.
 Satz, Debra (2004). "Feminist Perspectives on Reproduction and the Family". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University. Archived from the original on 21 July 2020. Retrieved 6 February 2015.
 Lorber, J & Farrell, S (eds.) (1990) The Social Construction of Gender. Sage, Newbury Park. ISBN 0-8039-3956-6
 Wearing, B (1996). Gender: The Pain and Pleasure of Difference. Longman, Melbourne ISBN 0-582-86903-X.
 Acker, J. (1990). "Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies: A Theory of Gendered Organizations" (PDF). Gender & Society. 4 (2): 139–158. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.693.1964. doi:10.1177/089124390004002002. JSTOR 189609. S2CID 40897237. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2015.
 Deji, Olanike F. (2012) Gender Concepts and Theories. Gender and Rural Development. Berlin: Lit. N.
 Glover, D and Kaplan, C (2000) Genders Archived 17 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Routledge, New York ISBN 0-415-44243-5, p. xxi.
 Mikkola, Mari (12 May 2008). "Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2016 ed.). Stanford University. Archived from the original on 25 January 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2016.
 Lloyd, M. (1999). "Performativity, Parody, Politics". Theory, Culture & Society. 16 (2): 195–213. doi:10.1177/02632769922050476. S2CID 145251297.
 Ingraham, Chrys (1994). "The Heterosexual Imaginary: Feminist Sociology and Theories of Gender". Sociological Theory. 12 (2): 203–219. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.470.737. doi:10.2307/201865. JSTOR 201865.
 Christian, Lisa M.; Cole, Steve W.; McDade, Thomas; Pachankis, John E.; Morgan, Ethan; Strahm, Anna M.; Kamp Dush, Claire M. (1 October 2021). "A biopsychosocial framework for understanding sexual and gender minority health: A call for action". Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 129: 107–116. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.06.004. ISSN 0149-7634. PMC 8429206. PMID 34097981.
 Ma. del Pilar Sánchez López; Rosa M. Limiñana-Gras, eds. (2017). The psychology of gender and health : conceptual and applied global concerns. London: Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-12-803866-6. OCLC 967324413.
 Iantaffi, Alex (2021). Gender trauma : healing cultural, social, and historical gendered trauma. Meg-John Barker. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. ISBN 978-1-78775-107-1. OCLC 1202930548.
 Yudkin, M. (1978). "Transsexualism and women: A critical perspective". Feminist Studies. 4 (3): 97–106. doi:10.2307/3177542. hdl:2027/spo.0499697.0004.310. JSTOR 3177542.
 Berger, Miriam (15 December 2019). "A Guide to How Gender-Neutral Language is Developing Around the World". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 January 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
 "Maid". wiktionary.org. Retrieved 14 December 2023.
 Valentine, J. Randolph, 2001, p. 114.
 Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014). The expression of gender. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 124. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
 Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014). The expression of gender. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 110. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
 Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014). The expression of gender. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 115. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
 Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014). The expression of gender. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820.
 Lindqvist, Anna; Renström, Emma Aurora; Sendén, Marie Gustafsson (18 October 2019). "Reducing a Male Bias in Language? Establishing the Efficiency of Three Different Gender-Fair Language Strategies". Sex Roles. 81 (1–2): 109–117. doi:10.1007/s11199-018-0974-9. S2CID 255011887.
 Guichard, Michaël (31 May 2023). "Emesal: The Language of Women and Lamenters in Cuneiform Literature in the Early Second Millennium BC in Mesopotamia". hypotheses.org. Retrieved 4 November 2023.
 Dixon, R. M. W. (1980). "Speech and song styles: Avoidance styles". The languages of Australia. Vol. Section 3.3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 58–59.
 "Irish Sign Language". www.irishdeafsociety.ie. Retrieved 28 July 2020.
 Nimmo, Cayla (14 July 2023). "Navajo Nation's LGBTQ Pride Event Celebrates A Return To The Culture's History". NPR. Retrieved 3 November 2023.
 "Free & Equal Campaign Fact Sheet: Intersex" (PDF). United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 28 March 2016.
 Migiro, Katy (5 December 2014). "Kenya takes step toward recognizing intersex people in landmark ruling". Reuters. Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
 Promoting and Protecting Human Rights in relation to Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Sex Characteristics. Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions. 2016. ISBN 978-0-9942513-7-4. Archived from the original on 15 January 2017. Retrieved 12 November 2016.
 Berger, Miriam (15 December 2019). "A Guide to How Gender-Neutral Language is Developing Around the World". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 January 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
 Schiebinger, Londa (2001). "Has Feminism Changed Science?". Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society. 25 (4) (2nd ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press: 1171–5. doi:10.1086/495540. ISBN 978-0-674-00544-0. PMID 17089478. S2CID 225088475.
 Sheffield, Suzanne Le-May (2006). Women and Science: Social Impact and Interaction. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. pp. 129–134. ISBN 978-0-8135-3737-5.
 Eisenhart, Margaret A.; Finkel, Elizabeth (1998). "Women's Science: Learning and Succeeding from the Margins". Science Education. 84 (6). Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 34–36. Bibcode:2000SciEd..84..793A. doi:10.1002/1098-237X(200011)84:6<793::AID-SCE6>3.0.CO;2-K. ISBN 978-0-226-19544-5.
 "Sustainable Development Goal 5: Gender equality". UN Women. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
 "New Civilizations in the Eastern and Western Hemispheres, 2000-250 BCE" (PDF). 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 December 2023. Retrieved 23 December 2023.
 Tuchman, Lauren (18 January 2012). "The Shekhinah or The Divine Presence or Divine Feminine in Judaism". State of Formation. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
 "Gender Diversity in Jewish Tradition | Reform Judaism". reformjudaism.org. Retrieved 23 December 2023.
 "The Eight Genders in the Talmud". My Jewish Learning. Retrieved 23 December 2023.
 Tompkins, Stephan (2 June 2015). "Why is God not female?". BBC. Retrieved 4 November 2023.
 "Arhanarishvara: Hindu deity". Britannica. Archived from the original on 15 August 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
 Vohra, Ashok (8 March 2005), "The Male-Female Hologram," Times of India, p. 9.
 Gender and Poverty Reduction Archived 29 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine. UNPD.org. 29 October 2014
 Peterson, Janice (1987). "The Feminization of Poverty". Journal of Economic Issues. 21 (1): 329–337. doi:10.1080/00213624.1987.11504613. JSTOR 4225831.
 Stoiljkovic, Nena. Smart finance Archived 17 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine. D+C Development and Cooperation
 Christopher, Karen, et al. The Gender Gap in Poverty in Modern Nations: Single Motherhood, The Market, and the State. University of California Press.
 Cagatay, Nilufer. "Trade, Gender and Poverty." pp. 4–8. United Nations.
 Chant, Sylvia (2008). "The 'Feminisation of Poverty' and the 'Feminisation' of Anti-Poverty Programmes: Room for Revision?". Journal of Development Studies. 44 (2): 165–197. doi:10.1080/00220380701789810. S2CID 154939529.
 Grant, Jaime M.; Mottet, Lisa A.; Tanis, Justin; Harrison, Jack; Herman, Jody L.; Keisling, Mara (2011). "Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey". National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018.
 "Transgender FAQ". GLAAD. 8 November 2013. Archived from the original on 8 May 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2015.
 Agnew, R. (2012). "Reflection on "A Revised Strain Theory of Delinquency"". Social Forces. 91: 33–38. doi:10.1093/sf/sos117. S2CID 145274165.
 Grothoff, G. E.; Kempf-Leonard, K.; Mullins, C. (2014). "Gender and Juvenile Drug Abuse: A General Strain Theory Perspective". Women & Criminal Justice. 24: 22–43. doi:10.1080/08974454.2013.842519. S2CID 144473355.
 Moon, B.; Blurton, D.; McCluskey, J.D. (2007). "General Strain Theory and Delinquency: Focusing on the Influences of Key Strain Characteristics on Delinquency". Crime & Delinquency. 54 (4): 582–613. doi:10.1177/0011128707301627. S2CID 145118032.
 Adema, W., Ali, N., Frey, V., Kim, H., Lunati, M., Piacentini, M. and Queisser, M. (2014). Enhancing Women's Economic Empowerment Through Entrepreneurship and Business leadership in OECD Countries. OECD.
 [1] Archived 2 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine OECD, ILO, IMF and WBG, (2014). Achieving stronger growth by promoting a more genderbalanced economy. Report prepared for the G20 Labour and Employment Ministerial Meeting. Melbourne, Australia: G20 Labour and Employment Ministerial Meeting.
 Olsson, Lennart et al. (2014) "Livelihoods and Poverty" Archived 28 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine, pp. 793–832 in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. C.B. Field et al. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Birkmann, Joern et al. (2014)"Emergent Risks and Key Vulnerabilities" Archived 23 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine, pp. 1039–1099 in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. C.B. Field et al. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Roehr, Ulrike (2007). "Gender, Climate Change and Adaptation. Introduction to the Gender Dimensions" Archived 17 May 2015 at the Library of Congress Web Archives. unep.org
 MacGregor, S. (2010). "A stranger silence still: The need for feminist social research on climate change". The Sociological Review. 57 (2_suppl): 124–140. doi:10.1111/j.1467-954X.2010.01889.x. S2CID 141663550.
 Tuana, N. (2013). "Gendering Climate Knowledge for Justice: Catalyzing a New Research Agenda". Research, Action and Policy: Addressing the Gendered Impacts of Climate Change. pp. 17–31. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5518-5_2. ISBN 978-94-007-5517-8.
 Boyd, Emily (2009). "The Noel Kempff Project in Bolivia: Gender, Power, and Decision-Making in Climate Mitigation", pp. 101–110 in Climate Change and Gender Justice. Geraldine Terry and Caroline Sweetman (eds.). Warwickshire: Practical Action Publishing, Oxfam GB.
 Gourdreau, Jenna (26 April 2010). "What men and women are doing on Facebook". Forbes. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 12 April 2016.
 Tufekci, Zeynep (31 July 2008). "Gender, social capital and social network(ing) sites: Women bonding, men searching". American Sociological Association. Archived from the original on 3 March 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
 Tortajada-Giménez, Iolanda; Araüna-Baró, Núria; Martínez-Martínez, Inmaculada José (1 June 2013). "Advertising Stereotypes and Gender Representation in Social Networking Sites". Comunicar. 21 (41): 177–186. doi:10.3916/C41-2013-17. hdl:10272/7056.
 Barker, V (2009). "Older adolescents' motivations for social network site use: The influence of gender, group identity, and collective self-esteem". Cyberpsychology & Behavior. 12 (2) (2 ed.): 209–213. doi:10.1089/cpb.2008.0228. PMID 19250021. S2CID 5446136.
 de Ridder, Sander; van Bauwel, Sofie (1 January 2015). "Youth and intimate media cultures: Gender, sexuality, relationships, and desire as storytelling practices in social networking sites" (PDF). Communications. 40 (3). doi:10.1515/commun-2015-0012. hdl:1854/LU-5889652. S2CID 199487985. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 20 April 2018.
 Herring, Susan; Kapidzic, Sanja (2015). Teens, Gender, and Self-Presentation in Social Media (2 ed.). International encyclopedia of social and behavioral sciences.
 Malin, Sveningsson Elm (1 January 2007). "Doing and undoing gender in a Swedish Internet community". Cambridge. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
 Gauntlett, D (2008). Media, Gender and Identity: An Introduction. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-15502-6. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
 Herring, Susan C.; Kapidzic, Sanja. "Teens, Gender, and Self-Presentation in Social Media. Sciences" (PDF). Oxford. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 February 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
Bibliography
Butler, Judith (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Thinking Gender'. New York & London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-38955-6.
Butler, Judith (1993). Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of "Sex". New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-61015-5.
Fausto-Sterling, Anne (2000). Sexing the body: gender politics and the construction of sexuality. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-07714-4.
External links
Gender
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Resources from Wikiversity
GenPORT: Your gateway to gender and science resources
Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook
vte
Gender and sexual identities
vte
Gender studies
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: GenderSocial conceptsSocial constructionismSociological theoriesFeminismLGBTQ
This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:59 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Gender

98 languages
Add topic



WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Early years
Club career

International career

Player profile

Retirement and tributes
Managerial career

Personal life

Death

In popular culture
Career statistics

Managerial statistics
Honours
Works
See also
References
External links
Diego Maradona

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Maradona" redirects here. For other uses, see Maradona (disambiguation).
In this Spanish name, the first or paternal surname is Maradona and the second or maternal family name is Franco.
Diego Maradona

Maradona after winning the 1986 FIFA World Cup with Argentina
Personal information
Full name	Diego Armando Maradona Franco[1]
Date of birth	30 October 1960
Place of birth	Lanús, Argentina
Date of death	25 November 2020 (aged 60)
Place of death	Dique Luján, Argentina
Height	1.65 m (5 ft 5 in)[2]
Position(s)	Attacking midfielder, second striker
Youth career
1967–1969	Estrella Roja
1969–1976	Argentinos Juniors
Senior career*
Years	Team	Apps	(Gls)
1976–1981	Argentinos Juniors	166	(116)
1981–1982	Boca Juniors	40	(28)
1982–1984	Barcelona	36	(22)
1984–1991	Napoli	188	(81)
1992–1993	Sevilla	26	(5)
1993–1994	Newell's Old Boys	5	(0)
1995–1997	Boca Juniors	30	(7)
Total		491	(259)
International career
1977–1979	Argentina U20	15	(8)
1977–1994	Argentina	91	(34)
Managerial career
1994	Deportivo Mandiyú
1995	Racing Club
2008–2010	Argentina
2011–2012	Al-Wasl
2013–2017	Deportivo Riestra (assistant)
2017–2018	Fujairah
2018–2019	Dorados de Sinaloa
2019–2020	Gimnasia de La Plata
Medal record
*Club domestic league appearances and goals
Diego Maradona	This article is part of a series about
Diego Maradona
Argentine professional footballer

International goalsThe hand of GodGoal of the CenturyComparisons to PeléNew Maradona
Eponyms and public art

Estadio Diego Armando MaradonaStadio Diego Armando MaradonaEstadio Único Diego Armando MaradonaSistine Chapel of Football
Films

Hero (1987)El camino de San Diego (2006)Maradona, the Hand of God (2007)In the Hands of the Gods (2007)Maradona by Kusturica (2008)I Am Diego Maradona (2015)Diego Maradona (2019)
Media

Maradona in Mexico (2019)Maradona: Blessed Dream (2021)
Family

Diego SinagraHugo MaradonaRaúl MaradonaHernán López
Related

Iglesia Maradoniana"Maradona (kesä '86)"Peter Shilton's Handball Maradona (1986)
vte
Diego Armando Maradona Franco (Spanish: [ˈdjeɣo aɾˈmando maɾaˈðona ˈfɾaŋko]; 30 October 1960 – 25 November 2020) was an Argentine professional football player and manager. Widely regarded as one of the greatest players in the history of the sport, he was one of the two joint winners of the FIFA Player of the 20th Century award, alongside Pelé.

An advanced playmaker who operated in the classic number 10 position, Maradona's vision, passing, ball control, and dribbling skills were combined with his small stature, which gave him a low centre of gravity and allowed him to manoeuvre better than most other players. His presence and leadership on the field had a great effect on his team's general performance, while he would often be singled out by the opposition. In addition to his creative abilities, he possessed an eye for goal and was known to be a free kick specialist. A precocious talent, Maradona was given the nickname El Pibe de Oro ("The Golden Boy"), a name that stuck with him throughout his career.

Maradona was the first player to set the world record transfer fee twice: in 1982 when he transferred to Barcelona for £5 million, and in 1984 when he moved to Napoli for a fee of £6.9 million. He played for Argentinos Juniors, Boca Juniors, Barcelona, Napoli, Sevilla and Newell's Old Boys during his club career, and is most famous for his time at Napoli where he won numerous accolades and led the club to their first Serie A title win only to do it all over again one year later. Maradona also had a troubled off-field life and his time with Napoli ended after he was banned for taking cocaine.

In his international career with Argentina, he earned 91 caps and scored 34 goals. Maradona played in four FIFA World Cups, including the 1986 World Cup in Mexico, where he captained Argentina and led them to victory over West Germany in the final, and won the Golden Ball as the tournament's best player. In the 1986 World Cup quarter final, he scored both goals in a 2–1 victory over England that entered football history for two different reasons. The first goal was an unpenalized handling foul known as the "Hand of God", while the second goal followed a 60 m (66 yd) dribble past five England players, voted "Goal of the Century" by FIFA.com voters in 2002.

Maradona also had a career in management. He became the coach of Argentina's national football team in November 2008. He was in charge of the team at the 2010 World Cup in South Africa before leaving at the end of the tournament. He then coached Dubai-based club Al Wasl in the UAE Pro-League for the 2011–12 season. In 2017, Maradona became the coach of Fujairah before leaving at the end of the season. From May to September 2018, he was the chairman of Dynamo Brest. From September 2018 to June 2019, Maradona was coach of Mexican club Dorados, and was the coach of Argentine Primera División club Gimnasia de La Plata from September 2019 until his death in 2020. In 2022, he was ranked as the third best football player of all time by football magazine FourFourTwo.[3]

Early years
Diego Armando Maradona was born on 30 October 1960, at the Policlínico (Polyclinic) Evita Hospital in Lanús, Buenos Aires Province, to a poor family that had moved from Corrientes Province; he was raised in Villa Fiorito, a shantytown on the southern outskirts of Buenos Aires, Argentina.[4][5] He was the first son after four daughters. He has two younger brothers, Hugo (el Turco) and Raúl (Lalo), both of whom were also professional football players.[6][7] His father Diego Maradona "Chitoro" (1927–2015), who worked at a chemicals factory, was of Guaraní (Indigenous) and Galician (Spanish) descent,[8] and his mother Dalma Salvadora Franco, "Doña Tota" (1930–2011), was of Italian and Croatian descent.[9][10][11][12][13]

When Diego came to Argentinos Juniors for trials, I was really struck by his talent and couldn't believe he was only eight years old. In fact, we asked him for his ID card so we could check it, but he told us he didn't have it on him. We were sure he was having us on because, although he had the physique of a child, he played like an adult. When we discovered he'd been telling us the truth, we decided to devote ourselves purely to him.

— Francisco Cornejo, youth coach who discovered Maradona[14]

Maradona playing at the Torneos Evita in 1973 (a national sporting event in Argentina) with the "Cebollitas"
Maradona's parents were both born and brought up in the town of Esquina in the north-east province of Corrientes on the banks of the Corriente River. In the 1950s, they left Esquina and settled in Buenos Aires.[5] Maradona received his first football as a gift at age three and quickly became devoted to the game.[15] At age eight, he was spotted by a talent scout while he was playing in his local club Estrella Roja. In March 1969 he was recommended to Los Cebollitas (The Little Onions), the junior team of Buenos Aires's Argentinos Juniors by his close friend and football rival Gregorio Carrizo who had already been picked by coach Francis Gregorio Cornejo.[16][17] Maradona became a star for the Cebollitas, and as a 12-year-old ball boy he amused spectators by showing his ball skills during the halftime breaks of Argentinos Juniors' first division games.[18] During 1973 and 1974, Maradona led Cebollitas to two Evita Tournament wins and 141 undefeated games in a row, playing alongside players like Adrian Domenech and Claudio Rodríguez, in what is regarded as the best youth team in the history of Argentine football.[19] Maradona named Brazilian playmaker Rivellino and Manchester United winger George Best among his inspirations growing up.[20][21]

Club career
Argentinos Juniors

Maradona's most famous nutmeg during his debut in the Primera División, 20 October 1976
On 20 October 1976, Maradona made his professional debut for Argentinos Juniors, 10 days before his 16th birthday,[22] versus Talleres de Córdoba. He entered to the pitch wearing the number 16 jersey, and became the youngest player in the history of the Argentine Primera División. A few minutes into his debut, Maradona kicked the ball through the legs of Juan Domingo Cabrera, a nutmeg that would become symbolic of his talent.[23] After the game, Maradona said: "That day I felt I had held the sky in my hands."[24] Thirty years later, Cabrera remembered Maradona's debut: "I was on the right side of the field and went to press him, but he didn't give me a chance. He made the nutmeg and when I turned around, he was far away from me."[25]

Maradona scored his first goal as a professional against Marplatense team San Lorenzo on 14 November 1976, two weeks after turning 16, and added another goal in the match as well.[26] Maradona made 11 appearances that season, with the two goals scored on his debut being the only ones he scored.

In the 1977 season, Maradona played 49 matches and scored 19 goals, and started to get on the radar of other South American clubs. In the 1978 season, Maradona scored 26 goals in 35 matches, and had the 1978 World Cup in his sights. However, when the squads were released on 19 May, he was not selected by coach Cesar Luis Menotti to the surprise of many.[27] Two days after being left out, he scored a brace in a victory against his Chacarita Juniors. In 1979, Maradona scored 26 goals in 26 games, and finished top scorer in both Metropolitan and Nacional tournaments. in 1980, he scored 43 goals in 45 appearances and was the top scorer again for the last four consecutive tournaments.[28]

Boca Juniors

Maradona being held aloft Boca Juniors supporters after winning the 1981 Metropolitano title
Maradona spent five years at Argentinos Juniors, from 1976 to 1981, scoring 115 goals in 167 appearances before his US$4-million transfer to Boca Juniors in February 1981.[29] Maradona received offers to join other clubs, including River Plate who offered to make him the club's best paid player.[30] However, River decided to drop its bid due to its large payroll in keeping Daniel Passarella and Ubaldo Fillol.[31]

Maradona signed a contract with Boca Juniors on 20 February 1981. He made his debut two days later against Talleres de Córdoba, scoring twice in the club's 4–1 win. On 10 April, Maradona played his first Superclásico against River Plate at La Bombonera stadium. Boca defeated River 3–0 with Maradona scoring a goal after dribbling past Alberto Tarantini and Fillol.[32] Despite the distrustful relationship between Maradona and Boca Juniors manager, Silvio Marzolini,[33] Boca had a successful season, winning the league title after securing a point against Racing Club.[34] That would be the only title won by Maradona in the Argentine domestic league.[35]

Barcelona
"He had complete mastery of the ball. When Maradona ran with the ball or dribbled through the defence, he seemed to have the ball tied to his boots. I remember our early training sessions with him: the rest of the team were so amazed that they just stood and watched him. We all thought ourselves privileged to be witnesses of his genius."

—Barcelona teammate Lobo Carrasco[36]
After the 1982 World Cup, Maradona was transferred to Barcelona for a then world record fee of £5 million ($7.6 million).[37] In the 1982–83 season, under coach César Luis Menotti, Barcelona and Maradona won two trophies, the Copa del Rey and Copa de la Liga, both of them coming against Real Madrid.

On 26 June 1983, in the 1st leg of the Copa de la Liga finals at Estadio Santiago Bernabeu, Maradona scored and became the first Barcelona player to be applauded by arch-rival Real Madrid fans.[38] Maradona dribbled past Madrid goalkeeper Agustín, and as he approached the empty goal, he stopped just as Madrid defender Juan José came sliding in an attempt to block the shot. José ended up crashing into the post, before Maradona slotted the ball into the net.[39] With the manner in which the goal was scored resulting in applause from opposition fans, only Ronaldinho (in November 2005) and Andrés Iniesta (in November 2015) have since been granted such an ovation as Barcelona players from Madrid fans at the Santiago Bernabéu.[38][40] Three days later, Barcelona won the second leg 2–1, with Maradona scoring a penalty and helping his club win another title against their archrivals.


Moment when Athletic Bilbao defender Andoni Goikoetxea injured Maradona on 24 September 1983
Due to illness and injury as well as controversial incidents on the field, Maradona had a difficult tenure in Barcelona.[41] First a bout of hepatitis, then a broken ankle in a La Liga game at the Camp Nou in September 1983 caused by a reckless tackle by Athletic Bilbao's Andoni Goikoetxea—nicknamed "the Butcher of Bilbao"—threatened to jeopardize Maradona's career, but with treatment and rehabilitation, it was possible for him to return to the pitch after a three-month recovery period.[22][42]


Maradona with his fellow countryman Mario Kempes before a Barcelona match against Valencia in 1982
Maradona was directly involved in a violent fight during the 1984 Copa del Rey Final in Madrid against Athletic Bilbao.[43] After receiving another hard tackle by Goikoetxea, as well as being taunted with racist insults related to his father's Native American ancestry throughout the match by Bilbao fans, and being provoked by Bilbao's Miguel Sola at full time after Barcelona lost 1–0, Maradona snapped.[43] He aggressively got up, stood inches from Sola's face and the two exchanged words. This started a chain reaction of emotional reactions from both teams. Using expletives, Sola mimicked a gesture from the crowd towards Maradona by using a xenophobic term.[44] Maradona then headbutted Sola, elbowed another Bilbao player in the face and kneed another player in the head, knocking him out cold.[43] The Bilbao squad surrounded Maradona to exact some retribution, with Goikoetxea connecting with a high kick to his chest, before the rest of the Barcelona squad joined in to help Maradona. From this point, Barcelona and Bilbao players brawled on the field with Maradona in the centre of the action, kicking and punching anyone in a Bilbao shirt.[43]

The mass brawl was played out in front of the Spanish King Juan Carlos and an audience of 100,000 fans inside the stadium, and more than half of Spain watching on television.[45] After fans began throwing solid objects on the field at the players, coaches and even photographers, sixty people were injured, with the incident effectively sealing Maradona's transfer out of the club in what was his last game in a Barcelona shirt.[44] One Barcelona executive stated: "When I saw those scenes of Maradona fighting and the chaos that followed I realized we couldn't go any further with him."[45] Maradona got into frequent disputes with Barcelona executives, particularly club president Josep Lluís Núñez, culminating with a demand to be transferred out of the Camp Nou in 1984. During his two injury-hit seasons at Barcelona, Maradona scored 38 goals in 58 games.[46] Maradona transferred to Napoli in Italy's Serie A for another world record fee, £6.9 million ($10.48 million).[47]

Napoli

Maradona saluting the crowd at the Stadio San Paolo in Naples during his presentation on 5 July 1984
Maradona arrived in Naples and was presented to the world media as a Napoli player on 5 July 1984, where he was welcomed by 75,000 fans at his presentation at the Stadio San Paolo.[48] Sports writer David Goldblatt commented, "They [the fans] were convinced that the saviour had arrived."[49] A local newspaper stated that despite the lack of a "mayor, houses, schools, buses, employment and sanitation, none of this matters because we have Maradona".[49] Prior to Maradona's arrival, Italian football was dominated by teams from the north and centre of the country, such as AC Milan, Juventus, Inter Milan and Roma, and no team in the south of the Italian Peninsula had ever won a league title. This was perhaps the perfect scenario for Maradona and his working-class-sympathetic image, as he joined a once-great team that was facing relegation at the end of the 1983–84 Serie A season, in what was the toughest and most highly regarded football league in Europe.[49][50]

At Napoli, Maradona reached the peak of his professional career: he soon inherited the captain's armband from Napoli veteran defender Giuseppe Bruscolotti[51] and quickly became an adored star among the club's fans; in his time there he elevated the team to the most successful era in its history.[49] Maradona played for Napoli at a period when north–south tensions in Italy were at a peak due to a variety of issues, notably the economic differences between the two.[49]

Led by Maradona, Napoli won their first ever Serie A Championship in 1986–87.[49] Regarding the celebrations, Goldblatt wrote, "The celebrations were tumultuous. A rolling series of impromptu street parties and festivities broke out contagiously across the city in a round-the-clock carnival which ran for over a week. The world was turned upside down. The Neapolitans held mock funerals for Juventus and Milan, burning their coffins, their death notices announcing 'May 1987, the other Italy has been defeated. A new empire is born.'"[49] Murals of Maradona were painted on the city's ancient buildings, and newborn children were named in his honour.[49] Napoli completed a double that year, when they won the 1987 Coppa Italia final on aggregate against Atalanta. Maradona had been one of the key players of the campaign, scoring seven goals in ten matches, including a brace in the team's first group game against SPAL.[52]

The following season, the team's prolific attacking trio, formed by Maradona, Bruno Giordano, and Careca, was later dubbed the "Ma-Gi-Ca" (magical) front-line.[53] Despite the team's failing to defend their league title, losing out to AC Milan after a collapse in the final four matches, Maradona was the Serie A top scorer in the 1987–88 season with 15 goals, and was the all-time leading goalscorer for Napoli, with 115 goals,[54] until his record was broken by Marek Hamšík in 2017.[35][55][56] He was also the top scorer for that season's Coppa Italia, scoring six goals,[57] despite being eliminated in the quarter-finals by Torino, with Maradona's two goals in the second leg not enough to prevent the elimination.[58] In the 1988–89 season, Napoli finished runner-up in the league and in the Coppa Italia, losing to Sampdoria in the final. However the team avenged these runner-up finishes with the UEFA Cup title, won over two legs in the final against Stuttgart. During the second leg of the quarterfinals against rivals Juventus, Maradona scored a penalty, and Napoli eventually qualified to the next round after extra time.[59] During the first leg of the finals, Maradona scored from a penalty in a 2–1 home victory and later assisted Careca's match-winning goal,[60][61] while in the second leg on 17 May—a 3–3 away draw—he assisted Ciro Ferrara's goal with a header.[62][63]

Napoli would win their second league title in 1989–90, and later won the 1990 Italian Supercup, beating rivals Juventus 5–1.[49] When asked who was the toughest player he ever faced, AC Milan central defender Franco Baresi stated it was Maradona, a view shared by his Milan teammate Paolo Maldini.[64][65]

Although Maradona was successful on the field during his time in Italy, his personal problems increased. His cocaine use continued, and he received US$70,000 in fines from his club for missing games and practices, ostensibly because of "stress".[66] He faced a scandal there regarding an illegitimate son, and he was also the object of some suspicion over an alleged friendship with the Camorra crime syndicate.[67][68][69][70] He also faced intense backlash and harassment from some local fans after the 1990 World Cup, in which he and Argentina beat Italy in a semi-final match at the San Paolo stadium.

In 2000, the number 10 jersey of Napoli was officially retired, but in 2011, Maradona stated that he wanted Ezequiel Lavezzi to use it.[71] In a poll on Il Mattino, 54% of fans voted to keep the shirt retired, and the change ultimately did not occur.[72] On 4 December 2020, nine days after Maradona's death, Napoli's home stadium was renamed Stadio Diego Armando Maradona.[73]

Late career
After serving a 15-month ban for failing a drug test for cocaine, Maradona left Napoli in disgrace in 1992. Despite interest from Real Madrid and Marseille, he signed for Sevilla, where he stayed for one year.[74] In 1993, he played for Newell's Old Boys and in 1995 returned to Boca Juniors for a two-year stint.[22] Maradona also appeared for Tottenham Hotspur in a testimonial match for Osvaldo Ardiles against Internazionale, shortly before the 1986 World Cup.[75] In 1996, he played in a friendly match alongside his brother Raul for Toronto Italia against the Canadian National Soccer League All-Stars.[76] In 2000, he captained Bayern Munich in a friendly against the German national team in the farewell game of Lothar Matthäus.[77] Maradona was himself given a testimonial match on 10 November 2001, played between an all-star World XI and the Argentina national team, scoring two penalty kicks in a 6–3 win at La Bombonera.[78][79]

International career

Maradona on the ball against the Soviet Union in the 1979 FIFA World Youth Championship Final in Japan
Debut at age 16
Maradona made his full international debut at age 16, against Hungary, on 27 February 1977, only four months after his professional debut for Argentinos Juniors.[80]

He was left off the Argentine squad for the 1978 World Cup on home soil by coach César Luis Menotti who felt he was too young at age 17.[81] On 3 November 1978, just a few days after turning 18, Maradona played for the U20 Argentina team in a friendly match against Franz Beckenbauer's New York Cosmos, scoring twice in a 2–1 win.[82]

1979 World Youth Championship and Copa América
At age 18, Maradona played the 1979 FIFA World Youth Championship in Japan and emerged as the star of the tournament, shining in Argentina's 3–1 final win over the Soviet Union, scoring a total of six goals in six appearances in the tournament.[83] On 2 June 1979, Maradona scored his first senior international goal in a 3–1 win against Scotland at Hampden Park.[84] He went on to play for Argentina in two 1979 Copa América ties during August 1979, a 2–1 loss against Brazil and a 3–0 win over Bolivia in which he scored his side's third goal.[85] Speaking thirty years later on the impact of Maradona's performances in 1979, FIFA President Sepp Blatter stated, "Everyone has an opinion on Diego Armando Maradona, and that's been the case since his playing days. My most vivid recollection is of this incredibly gifted kid at the second FIFA U-20 World Cup in Japan in 1979. He left everyone open-mouthed every time he got on the ball."[86] Maradona and his compatriot Lionel Messi are the only players to win the Golden Ball at both the FIFA U-20 World Cup and FIFA World Cup. Maradona did so in 1979 and 1986, which Messi emulated in 2005 and 2014 (and again in 2022).[87][88]

Maradona appeared at the 1979 Copa América, where Argentina had a poor performance, being knocked out in the first round. Maradona exited the tournament having scored once in a 3–0 victory against Bolivia.[citation needed]

1982 World Cup
Maradona played his first World Cup tournament in 1982 in his new country of residence, Spain. Argentina played Belgium in the opening game of the 1982 Cup at the Camp Nou in Barcelona. Maradona did not perform to expectations,[89] as Argentina, the defending champions, lost 1–0. Although the team convincingly beat both Hungary and El Salvador in Alicante to progress to the second round, there were internal tensions within the team, with the younger, less experienced players at odds with the older, more experienced players. With a team that also included such players as Mario Kempes, Osvaldo Ardiles, Ramón Díaz, Daniel Bertoni, Alberto Tarantini, Ubaldo Fillol and Daniel Passarella, the Argentine side was defeated in the second round by Brazil and by eventual winners Italy. The Italian match is renowned for Maradona being aggressively man-marked by Claudio Gentile, as Italy beat Argentina at the Sarrià Stadium in Barcelona, 2–1.[90]

Maradona played in all five matches without being substituted, scoring twice against Hungary. He was fouled repeatedly in all five games and particularly in the last one against Brazil at the Sarrià, a game that was blighted by poor officiating and violent fouls. With Argentina already down 3–0 to Brazil, Maradona's temper eventually got the better of him and he was sent off with five minutes remaining for a serious retaliatory foul against Batista.[91][90]

1986 World Cup

The moment when Maradona flicks the ball with the hand past the outstretched arm of Peter Shilton, also known as the "Hand of God"
Maradona captained the Argentine national team to victory in the 1986 World Cup in Mexico, winning the final in Mexico City against West Germany.[92] Throughout the tournament, Maradona asserted his dominance and was the most dynamic player of the competition. He played every minute of every Argentina game, scoring five goals and making five assists; three of the assists came in the opening match against South Korea at the Olímpico Universitario Stadium in Mexico City. His first goal of the tournament came against Italy in the second group game in Puebla.[93] Argentina eliminated Uruguay in the first knockout round in Puebla, setting up a match against England at the Azteca Stadium, also in Mexico City.

After scoring two contrasting goals in the 2–1 quarter-final win against England, his legend was cemented.[42] The majesty of his second goal and the notoriety of his first led to the French newspaper L'Équipe describing Maradona as "half-angel, half-devil".[94] This match was played with the background of the Falklands War between Argentina and the United Kingdom.[95] Replays showed that the first goal was scored by striking the ball with his hand. Maradona was coyly evasive, describing it as "a little with the head of Maradona and a little with the hand of God".[92] It became known as the "Hand of God". Ultimately, on 22 August 2005, Maradona acknowledged on his television show that he had hit the ball with his hand purposely, and no contact with his head was made, and that he immediately knew the goal was illegitimate. This became known as an international fiasco in World Cup history. The goal stood, much to the wrath of the English players.[96]

"Maradona, turns like a little eel and comes away from trouble, little squat man... comes inside Butcher and leaves him for dead, outside Fenwick and leaves him for dead, and puts the ball away... and that is why Maradona is the greatest player in the world."

—Bryon Butler's BBC Radio commentary on Maradona's second goal against England.[97]
Maradona's second goal, just four minutes after the hotly disputed hand-goal, was later voted by FIFA as the greatest goal in the history of the World Cup. He received the ball in his own half, swivelled around and with 11 touches ran more than half the length of the field, dribbling past five English outfield players (Peter Beardsley, Steve Hodge, Peter Reid, Terry Butcher and Terry Fenwick) before he left goalkeeper Peter Shilton on his backside with a feint, and slotted the ball into the net.[98] This goal was voted "Goal of the Century" in a 2002 online poll conducted by FIFA.[99] A 2002 Channel 4 poll in the UK saw his performance ranked number 6 in the list of the 100 Greatest Sporting Moments.[100]


Maradona right before scoring the "Goal of the Century" (four minutes after his "Hand of God" goal) against England in Mexico 1986. In 2022, his shirt sold for £7.1 million ($9.3 million), the highest for a piece of sports memorabilia.[101]
Maradona followed this with two more goals in a semi-final match against Belgium at the Azteca, including another virtuoso dribbling display for the second goal. In the final match, West Germany attempted to contain him by double-marking him, but in the 84th minute he nevertheless found space past West German player Lothar Matthäus to give the final pass to Jorge Burruchaga for the winning goal. Argentina beat West Germany 3–2 in front of 115,000 fans at the Azteca with Maradona lifting the World Cup as captain.[102]

During the tournament, Maradona attempted or created more than half of Argentina's shots, attempted a tournament-best 90 dribbles—three times more than any other player—and was fouled a record 53 times, winning his team twice as many free kicks as any player.[91] Maradona scored or assisted ten of Argentina's 14 goals (71%), including the assist for the winning goal in the final, ensuring that he would be remembered as one of the greatest names in football history.[91][103] By the end of the World Cup, Maradona went on to win the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament by unanimous vote and was widely regarded to have won the World Cup virtually single-handedly, something that he later stated he did not entirely agree with.[91][104][105][106] Zinedine Zidane, watching the 1986 World Cup as a 14-year-old, stated Maradona "was on another level".[107] In a tribute to him, Azteca Stadium authorities built a statue of him scoring the "Goal of the Century" and placed it at the entrance of the stadium.[108]


Maradona holding the FIFA World Cup trophy after winning the final to West Germany.
Regarding Maradona's performance at the 1986 World Cup in Mexico, in 2014, Roger Bennett of ESPN FC described it as "the most virtuoso performance a World Cup has ever witnessed,"[109] while Kevin Baxter of the Los Angeles Times called it "one of the greatest individual performances in tournament history,"[110] with Steven Goff of The Washington Post dubbing his performance as "one of the finest in tournament annals."[111] In 2002, Russell Thomas of The Guardian described Maradona's second goal against England in the 1986 World Cup quarter-finals as "arguably the greatest individual goal ever."[112] In a 2009 article for CBC Sports, John Molinaro described the goal as "the greatest ever scored in the tournament – and, maybe, in soccer."[113] In a 2018 article for Sportsnet, he added: "No other player, not even Pel[é] in 1958 nor Paolo Rossi in 1982, had dominated a single competition the way Maradona did in Mexico." He also went on to say of Maradona's performance: "The brilliant Argentine artist single-handedly delivered his country its second World Cup." Regarding his two memorable goals against England in the quarter-finals, he commented: "Yes, it was Maradona's hand, and not God's, that was responsible for the first goal against England. But while the 'Hand of God' goal remains one of the most contentious moments in World Cup history, there can be no disputing that his second goal against England ranks as the greatest ever scored in the tournament. It transcended mere sports – his goal was pure art."[114]

1987 and 1989 Copa América
At the 1987 Copa América in Argentina, he scored three goals in four matches, including a brace in a 3–0 victory against Ecuador, but Argentina lost the semi-final 0–1 against eventual winners Uruguay.[115]

In the 1989 Copa América in Brazil, Maradona played six games but would not score any goals. Argentina would finish the tournament third.

1990 World Cup
Maradona captained Argentina again in the 1990 World Cup in Italy to yet another World Cup final. An ankle injury affected his overall performance, and he was much less dominant than four years earlier, and the team were missing three of their best players due to injury. After losing their opening game to Cameroon at the San Siro in Milan, Argentina were almost eliminated in the group stage, only qualifying in third position from their group. In the round of 16 match against Brazil in Turin, Claudio Caniggia scored the only goal after being set up by Maradona.[116]

In the quarter-final, Argentina faced Yugoslavia in Florence; the match ended 0–0 after 120 minutes, with Argentina advancing in a penalty shootout even though Maradona's kick, a weak shot to the goalkeeper's right, was saved. The semi-final against the host nation Italy at Maradona's club stadium in Naples, the Stadio San Paolo, was also resolved on penalties after a 1–1 draw. This time, however, Maradona was successful with his effort, daringly rolling the ball into the net with an almost exact replica of his unsuccessful kick in the previous round. At the final in Rome, Argentina lost 1–0 to West Germany, the only goal being a controversial penalty scored by Andreas Brehme in the 85th minute, after Rudi Völler was adjudged to be fouled.[116] At the final whistle, Maradona burst into tears and blamed the referee for the loss.[117]

1993 Artemio Franchi Cup
On 24 February 1993, Maradona returned to the national team when Argentina played the 1993 Artemio Franchi Cup against Denmark in Mar del Plata. Argentina won 5–4 in a penalty shoot-out after a 1–1 draw.[118]

1994 World Cup
At the 1994 World Cup in the United States, Maradona played in only two games (both at the Foxboro Stadium near Boston), scoring one goal against Greece, before being sent home after failing a drug test for ephedrine doping.[119] After scoring Argentina's third goal against Greece, Maradona had one of the most remarkable World Cup goal celebrations as he ran towards one of the sideline cameras shouting with a distorted face and bulging eyes, in sheer elation of his return to international football.[120] This turned out to be Maradona's last international goal for Argentina.[121] In the second game, a 2–1 victory over Nigeria which was to be his last game for Argentina, he set up both of his team's goals on free kicks, the second an assist to Caniggia, in what were two very strong showings by the Argentine team.[122]

In his autobiography, Maradona argued that the test result was due to his personal trainer giving him the energy drink Rip Fuel.[123] His claim was that the U.S. version, unlike the Argentine one, contained the chemical and that, having run out of his Argentine dosage, his trainer unwittingly bought the U.S. formula.[123] FIFA expelled him from USA '94, and Argentina were subsequently eliminated in the round of 16 by Romania in Los Angeles, having been a weaker team without Maradona, even with players like Gabriel Batistuta and Claudio Caniggia on the squad.[124] Maradona also separately claimed that he had an agreement with FIFA, on which the organization reneged, to allow him to use the drug for weight loss before the competition in order to be able to play.[125] His failed drug test at the 1994 World Cup signalled the end of his international career, which lasted 17 years and yielded 34 goals from 91 games, including one winner's medal and one runners-up medal in the World Cup.[126]

Unofficial internationals
Alongside official internationals, Maradona also played and scored for an Argentina XI against the World XI in 1978 to mark the first anniversary of their first World Cup win,[127][128] scored for The Americas against the World in a UNICEF fundraiser a short time after the 1986 triumph,[127][128] a year after that captained the 'Rest of the World' against the English Football League XI to celebrate the organization's centenary (after reportedly securing a £100,000 appearance fee)[129][130]

Player profile
Style of play
See also: Creole football

Maradona exhibiting his ball control before a match against Lazio. Michel Platini stated, "Diego was capable of things no one else could match. The things I could do with a football, he could do with an orange."[14]
Described as a "classic number 10" in the media,[131] Maradona was a traditional playmaker who usually played in a free role, either as an attacking midfielder behind the forwards, or as a second striker in a front–two,[132][133][134] although he was also deployed as an offensive–minded central midfielder in a 4–4–2 formation on occasion.[135][136][137][138] A precocious talent, Maradona was given the nickname "El Pibe de Oro" ("The Golden Boy"), a name that stuck with him throughout his career.[139] He was renowned for his dribbling ability, vision, close ball control, passing and creativity, and is considered to have been one of the most skilful players in the sport.[106][140][141] He had a compact physique, and with his strong legs, low center of gravity, and resulting balance, he could withstand physical pressure well while running with the ball, despite his small stature,[109][142][143] while his acceleration, quick feet, and agility, combined with his dribbling skills and close control at speed, allowed him to change direction quickly, making him difficult for opponents to defend against.[144][145][146][147]


Viewed as one of the best dribblers in the game, Maradona (pictured on the ball against Belgium in 1986) would often go on runs against the opposition.
On his dribbling ability, former Dutch player Johan Cruyff saw similarities between Maradona and Lionel Messi with the ball seemingly attached to their boot.[148][149][150] His physical strengths were illustrated by his two goals against Belgium in the 1986 World Cup. Although he was known for his penchant for undertaking individual runs with the ball,[151] he was also a strategist and an intelligent team player, with excellent spatial awareness, as well as being highly technical with the ball. He was effective in limited spaces, and would attract defenders only to quickly dash out of the melee (as in the second goal against England in 1986),[152][153][154][155] or give an assist to a free teammate. Being short, but strong, he could hold the ball long enough with a defender on his back to wait for a teammate making a run or to find a gap for a quick shot. He showed leadership qualities on the field and captained Argentina in their World Cup campaigns of 1986, 1990 and 1994.[156][157] While he was primarily a creative playmaker, Maradona was also known for his finishing and goalscoring ability.[106][158] Former Milan manager Arrigo Sacchi also praised Maradona for his defensive work-rate off the ball in a 2010 interview with Il Corriere dello Sport.[159]

The team leader on and off the field – he would speak up on a range of issues on behalf of the players – Maradona's ability as a player and his overpowering personality had a major positive effect on his team, with his 1986 World Cup teammate Jorge Valdano stating:

Maradona was a technical leader: a guy who resolved all difficulties that may come up on the pitch. Firstly, he was in charge of making the miracles happen, that's something that gives team-mates a lot of confidence. Secondly, the scope of his celebrity was such that he absorbed all the pressures on behalf of his team-mates. What I mean is: one slept soundly the night before a game not just because you knew you were playing next to Diego and Diego did things no other player in the world could do, but also because unconsciously we knew that if it was the case that we lost then Maradona would shoulder more of the burden, would be blamed more, than the rest of us. That was the kind of influence he exercised on the team.[160]

Lauding the "charisma" of Maradona, another of his Argentina teammates, prolific striker Gabriel Batistuta, stated, "Diego could command a stadium, have everyone watch him. I played with him and I can tell you how technically decisive he was for the team".[161] Napoli's former president – Corrado Ferlaino – commented on Maradona's leadership qualities during his time with the club in 2008, describing him as "a coach on the pitch."[162]

"Even if I played for a million years, I'd never come close to Maradona. Not that I'd want to anyway. He's the greatest there's ever been."

—Lionel Messi, the player most closely identified with the "New Maradona" label.[86]
One of Maradona's trademark moves was dribbling full-speed on the right wing, and on reaching the opponent's goal line, delivering accurate passes to his teammates. Another trademark was the rabona, a reverse-cross pass shot behind the leg that holds all the weight.[163] This manoeuvre led to several assists, such as the cross for Ramón Díaz's header against Switzerland in 1980.[164] Moreover, he was also a well–known proponent of the roulette, a feint which involved him dragging the ball back first with one foot and then the other, while simultaneously performing a 360° turn; due to his penchant for using this move, it has even occasionally been described as the "Maradona turn" in the media.[165] He was also a dangerous free kick and penalty kick taker, who was renowned for his ability to bend the ball from corners and direct set pieces.[166][167][168] Regarded as one of the best dead-ball specialists of all time,[169][170][171][172] his free kick technique, which often saw him raise his knee at a high angle when striking the ball, thus enabling him to lift it high over the wall, allowed him to score free kicks even from close range, within 22 to 17 yards (20 to 16 metres) from the goal, or even just outside the penalty area.[173] His style of taking free kicks influenced several other specialists, including Gianfranco Zola,[171] Andrea Pirlo,[174] and Lionel Messi.[175]

Maradona was famous for his cunning personality.[176] Some critics view his controversial "Hand of God" goal at the 1986 World Cup as a clever manoeuvre, with one of the opposition players, Glenn Hoddle, admitting that Maradona had disguised it by flicking his head at the same time as palming the ball.[177] The goal itself has been viewed as an embodiment of the Buenos Aires shanty town Maradona was brought up in and its concept of viveza criolla—"cunning of the criollos".[178] Although critical of the illegitimate first goal, England striker Gary Lineker conceded, "When Diego scored that second goal against us, I felt like applauding. It was impossible to score such a beautiful goal. He's the greatest player of all time, by a long way. A genuine phenomenon."[14] Maradona used his hand in the 1990 World Cup, again without punishment, and this time on his own goal line, to prevent the Soviet Union from scoring.[179] A number of publications have referred to Maradona as the Artful Dodger, the urchin pickpocket from Charles Dickens' Oliver Twist.[180][181][182][183]

Maradona was dominantly left-footed, often using his left foot even when the ball was positioned more suitably for a right-footed connection.[184] His first goal against Belgium in the 1986 World Cup semi-final is a worthy indicator of such; he had run into the inside right channel to receive a pass but let the ball travel across to his left foot, requiring more technical ability. During his run past several England players in the previous round for the "Goal of the Century" he did not use his right foot once, despite spending the whole movement on the right-hand side of the pitch. In the 1990 World Cup second-round tie against Brazil, he used his right foot to set up the winning goal for Claudio Caniggia due to two Brazilian markers forcing him into a position that made use of his left foot less practical.[185]

Reception
Pelé scored more goals. Lionel Messi has won more trophies. Both have lived more stable lives than the overweight former cocaine addict who tops this list, whose relationship with football became increasingly strained the longer his career continued. If you've seen Diego Maradona with a football at his feet, you'll understand.

— Andrew Murray on Maradona topping FourFourTwo magazine's "100 Greatest Footballers Ever" list, July 2017.[186]

Maradona (right) and Lionel Messi in The Sistine Chapel of Football painting, on a ceiling of a sports club in Barracas, Buenos Aires
Maradona is widely regarded as the best player of his generation.[153] He is considered one of the greatest players of all time by pundits, players, and managers,[86][187][188] and by some as the best player ever.[186][189][190][191] Known as one of the most skilful players in the game, he is regarded as one of the greatest dribblers[109][142][149][150] and free kick takers in history.[169][170][171][172] A precocious talent in his youth,[139] in addition to his playing ability, Maradona also drew praise from his former manager Menotti for his dedication, determination, and the work-ethic he demonstrated in order to improve the technical aspect of his game in training, despite his natural gifts, with the manager noting: "I'm always cautious about using the word 'genius'. I find it hard to apply that even to Mozart. The beauty of Diego's game has a hereditary element – his natural ease with the ball – but it also owes a lot to his ability to learn: a lot of those brushstrokes, those strokes of 'genius', are in fact a product of his hard work. Diego worked very hard to be the best."[192] Maradona's former Napoli manager – Ottavio Bianchi – also praised his discipline in training, commenting: "Diego is different to the one that they depict. When you got him on his own he was a very good kid. It was beautiful to watch him and coach him. They all speak of the fact that he did not train, but it was not true because Diego was the last person to leave the pitch, it was necessary to send him away because otherwise he would stay for hours to invent free kicks."[193] However, although, as Bianchi noted, Maradona was known for making "great plays" and doing "unimaginable" and "incredible things" with the ball during training sessions,[194][195][196] and would even go through periods of rigorous exercise, he was equally known for his limited work-rate in training without the ball, and even gained a degree of infamy during his time in Italy for missing training sessions with Napoli, while he often trained independently instead of with his team.[194][197][198][199]

In a 2019 documentary film on his life, Diego Maradona, Maradona confessed that his weekly regime consisted of "playing a game on Sunday, going out until Wednesday, then hitting the gym on Thursday." Regarding his inconsistent training regimen, the film's director, Asif Kapadia, commented in 2020: "He had a metabolism. He would look so incredibly out of shape, but then he'd train like crazy and sweat it off by the time matchday came along. His body shape just didn't look like a footballer, but then he had this ability and this balance. He had a way of being, and that idea of talking to him honestly about how a typical week transpired was pretty amazing." He also revealed that Maradona was ahead of his time in the fact that he had a personal fitness coach – Fernando Signorini – who trained him in a variety of areas, in addition to looking after his physical conditioning, adding: "While he [Maradona] was in a football team he had his own regime. How many players would do that? How many players would even know to think like that? 'I'm different to anyone else so I need to train at what I'm good at and what I'm weak at.' Signorini is very well read and very intelligent. He would literally say, 'This is the way I'm going to train you, read this book.' He would help him psychologically, talk to him about philosophy, and things like that."[200][201] Moreover, Maradona was notorious for his poor diet and extreme lifestyle off the pitch, including his use of illicit drugs and alcohol abuse, which along with personal issues, his metabolism, medication that he was prescribed, and periods of inactivity due to injuries and suspensions, led to his significant weight–gain and physical decline as his career progressed; his lack of discipline and difficulties in his turbulent personal life are thought by some in the sport to have negatively impacted his performances and longevity in the later years of his playing career.[192][202]

A controversial figure in the sport, while he earned critical acclaim from players, pundits and managers over his playing style, he also drew criticism in the media for his temper and confrontational behaviour, both on and off the pitch.[203][204][205] However, in 2005, Paolo Maldini described Maradona both as the greatest player he ever faced, and also as the most honest, stating: "He was a model of good behaviour on the pitch – he was respectful of everyone, from the great players down to the ordinary team member. He was always getting kicked around and he never complained – not like some of today's strikers."[206] Franco Baresi stated when he was asked who was his greatest opponent: "Maradona; when he was on form, there was almost no way of stopping him,"[64] while fellow former Italy defender Giuseppe Bergomi described Maradona as the greatest player of all time in 2018.[207] Zlatan Ibrahimović said that his off-field antics did not matter, and that he should only be judged for the impact he made on the field. "For me Maradona is more than football. What he did as a footballer, in my opinion, he will be remembered forever. When you see number 10 who do you think about? Maradona. It is a symbol, even today there are those who choose that number for him."[208]

Today his skills would afford him greater protection. Back then they merely served as the red rag of provocation that would guarantee he would be the victim of brutal challenges wherever he played. The rules changed as a direct result of some of the injuries Maradona received. When I interviewed him a few years ago, he told me he thought players such as Lionel Messi owed him a great deal because some of the tackles he had endured would never be allowed today.

— Guillem Balagué writing for the BBC in 2020 on 'the magician, the cheat, the god, the flawed genius'.[42]
In 1999, Maradona was placed second behind Pelé by World Soccer in the magazine's list of the "100 Greatest Players of the 20th Century".[209] Along with Pelé, Maradona was one of the two joint winners of the "FIFA Player of the Century" award in 2000,[210][187] and also placed fifth in "IFFHS' Century Elections".[211] In a 2014 FIFA poll, Maradona was voted the second-greatest number 10 of all time, behind only Pelé,[212] and later that year, was ranked second in The Guardian's list of the 100 greatest World Cup players of all time, ahead of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, once again behind Pelé.[213] In 2017, FourFourTwo ranked him in first place in their list of "100 greatest players",[186] while in 2018 he was ranked in first place by the same magazine in their list of the "Greatest Football Players in World Cup History";[214] in March 2020, he was also ranked first by Jack Gallagher of 90min.com in their list of "Top 50 Greatest Players of All Time".[215] In May 2020, Sky Sports ranked Maradona as the best player never to have won the UEFA Champions League/European Cup.[216]

Retirement and tributes

Diego Maradona's blaugrana shirt on display in the FC Barcelona Museum
Hounded for years by the press, Maradona once fired a compressed-air rifle at reporters whom he claimed were invading his privacy.[217][218] This quote from former teammate Jorge Valdano summarises the feelings of many:

He is someone many people want to emulate, a controversial figure, loved, hated, who stirs great upheaval, especially in Argentina... Stressing his personal life is a mistake. Maradona has no peers inside the pitch, but he has turned his life into a show, and is now living a personal ordeal that should not be imitated.[219]

In 1990, the Konex Foundation from Argentina granted him the Diamond Konex Award, one of the most prestigious culture awards in Argentina, as the most important personality in sports in the last decade in his country.[220]

In April 1996, Maradona had a three-round exhibition boxing match with Santos Laciar for charity.[221] In 2000, Maradona published his autobiography Yo Soy El Diego ("I am The Diego"), which became a bestseller in Argentina.[222] Two years later, Maradona donated the Cuban royalties of his book to "the Cuban people and Fidel".[223]

In 2000, he won FIFA Player of the Century award which was to be decided by votes on their official website, their official magazine and a grand jury. Maradona won the Internet-based poll, garnering 53.6% of the votes against 18.53% for Pelé.[224] In spite of this, and shortly before the ceremony, FIFA added a second award and appointed a "Football Family" committee composed of football journalists that also gave to Pelé the title of best player of the century to make it a draw. Maradona also came fifth in the vote of the IFFHS (International Federation of Football History and Statistics).[211] In 2001, the Argentine Football Association (AFA) asked FIFA for authorization to retire the jersey number 10 for Maradona. FIFA did not grant the request, even though Argentine officials have maintained that FIFA hinted that it would.[225]

Maradona has topped a number of fan polls, including a 2002 FIFA poll in which his second goal against England was chosen as the best goal ever scored in a World Cup; he also won the most votes in a poll to determine the All-Time Ultimate World Cup Team. On 22 March 2010, Maradona was chosen number 1 in 'The Greatest 10 World Cup Players of All Time' by the London-based newspaper The Times.[226] Argentinos Juniors named its stadium after Maradona on 26 December 2003. In 2003, Maradona was employed by the Libyan footballer Al-Saadi Gaddafi, the third son of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, as a "technical consultant", while Al-Saadi was playing for the Italian club, Perugia, which was playing in Serie A at the time.[227]


Maradona in Kolkata, India, in December 2008. Maradona laid the foundation stone for a football academy in the eastern suburbs of the city, and was greeted by over 100,000 fans in Salt Lake Stadium.[228]
On 22 June 2005, it was announced that Maradona would return to former club Boca Juniors as a sports vice-president in charge of managing the First Division roster (after a disappointing 2004–05 season, which coincided with Boca's centenary).[229][230] His contract began 1 August 2005, and one of his first recommendations proved to be very effective: advising the club to hire Alfio Basile as the new coach.[231] With Maradona fostering a close relationship with the players, Boca won the 2005 Apertura, the 2006 Clausura, the 2005 Copa Sudamericana, and the 2005 Recopa Sudamericana.[232]

On 15 August 2005, Maradona made his debut as host of a talk-variety show on Argentine television, La Noche del 10 ("The Night of the no. 10"). His main guest on opening night was Pelé; the two had a friendly chat, showing no signs of past differences.[233] However, the show also included a cartoon villain with a clear physical resemblance to Pelé. In subsequent evenings, La Noche del 10 led the ratings on all occasions but one. Most guests were drawn from the worlds of football and show business, including Ronaldo and Zinedine Zidane, but also included interviews with other notable friends and personalities such as Cuban leader Fidel Castro and boxers Roberto Durán and Mike Tyson.[234] Maradona gave each of his guests a signed Argentina jersey, which Tyson wore when he arrived in Brazil, Argentina's biggest rivals.[235] In November 2005, however, Maradona rejected an offer to work with Argentina's national football team.[236]

In May 2006, Maradona agreed to take part in UK's Soccer Aid (a program to raise money for UNICEF).[237] In September 2006, Maradona, in his famous blue and white number 10, was the captain for Argentina in a three-day World Cup of Indoor Football tournament in Spain. On 26 August 2006, it was announced that Maradona was quitting his position in the club Boca Juniors because of disagreements with the AFA, who selected Alfio Basile to be the new coach of the Argentina national team.[238] In 2008, Serbian filmmaker Emir Kusturica made Maradona, a documentary about Maradona's life.[239]

On 1 September 2014, Maradona, along with many current and former footballing stars, took part in the "Match for Peace", which was played at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome, with the proceeds being donated entirely to charity.[240] Maradona set up a goal for Roberto Baggio during the first half of the match, with a chipped through-ball over the defence with the outside of his left foot.[241] Unusually, both Baggio and Maradona wore the number 10 shirt, despite playing on the same team.[241] On 17 August 2015, Maradona visited Ali Bin Nasser, the Tunisian referee of the Argentina–England quarter-final match at the 1986 World Cup where Maradona scored his Hand of God, and paid tribute to him by giving him a signed Argentine jersey.[242][243]

Managerial career
Club management

Maradona greeting fans after being appointed manager of Dubai club Al Wasl in 2011
Maradona began his managerial career alongside former Argentinos Juniors midfield teammate Carlos Fren. The pair led Mandiyú of Corrientes in 1994 and Racing Club in 1995, with little success.[176][244] In May 2011 he became manager of Dubai club Al Wasl FC in the United Arab Emirates.[245][246] Maradona was sacked on 10 July 2012.[247][248][249] In August 2013, Maradona moved on to become 'spiritual coach' at Argentine club Deportivo Riestra.[250] Maradona departed this role in 2017 to become the head coach of Fujairah, in the UAE second division, before leaving at the end of the season upon failure to secure promotion at the club.[251][252] In May 2018, Maradona was announced as the new chairman of Belarusian club Dynamo Brest.[253] He arrived in Brest and was presented by the club to start his duties in July.[254] In September 2018, he was appointed manager of Mexican second division side Dorados.[255] He made his debut with Dorados on 17 September with a 4–1 victory over Cafetaleros de Tapachula.[256] On 13 June 2019, after Dorados failed to clinch promotion to the Mexican top flight, Maradona's lawyer announced that he would be stepping down from the role, citing health reasons.[257]

On 5 September 2019, Maradona was unveiled as the new head coach of Gimnasia de La Plata, signing a contract until the end of the season.[258] After two months in charge he left the club on 19 November.[259] However, two days later, Maradona rejoined the club as manager saying that "we finally achieved political unity in the club".[260] Maradona insisted that Gabriel Pellegrino remain club president if he were to stay with Gimnasia de La Plata.[261][262] However it was still not clear if Pellegrino, who declined to run for re-election,[261][262] would stay on as club President.[261][262] Originally scheduled to be held on 23 November,[261] the election was delayed 15 days.[262] On 15 December, Pellegrino, who was encouraged by Maradona to seek re-election, was re-elected to a three-year term.[263] Despite having a bad record during the 2019–20 season, Gimnasia renewed Maradona's contract on 3 June 2020 for the 2020–21 season.[264] In November 2020, Maradona died in post. His coaching staff resigned from the club following his death.[265]

International management

Maradona as coach of Argentina in 2009. He left the position after the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.
After the resignation of Argentina national team coach Alfio Basile in 2008, Maradona immediately proposed his candidacy for the vacant role.[266] According to several press sources, his major challengers included; Diego Simeone, Carlos Bianchi, Miguel Ángel Russo, and Sergio Batista.[267] On 29 October 2008, AFA chairman Julio Grondona confirmed that Maradona would be the head coach of the national team.[268] On 19 November, Maradona managed Argentina for the first time when they played against Scotland at Hampden Park in Glasgow, which Argentina won 1–0.[269]

After winning his first three matches as the coach of the national team, he oversaw a 6–1 defeat to Bolivia, equalling the team's worst ever margin of defeat.[270][271] With two matches remaining in the qualification tournament for the 2010 World Cup, Argentina was in fifth place and faced the possibility of failing to qualify, but victory in the last two matches secured qualification for the finals.[272][273] After Argentina's qualification, Maradona used abusive language at the live post-game press conference, telling members of the media to "suck it and keep on sucking it".[274] FIFA responded with a two-month ban on all footballing activity, which expired on 15 January 2010, and a CHF 25,000 fine, with a warning as to his future conduct.[275] The friendly match scheduled to take place at home to the Czech Republic on 15 December, during the period of the ban, was cancelled. The only match Argentina played during Maradona's ban was a friendly away to Catalonia, which they lost 4–2.[276]

At the 2010 FIFA World Cup, Argentina started by winning 1–0 against Nigeria, followed by a 4–1 victory over South Korea on the strength of a Gonzalo Higuaín hat-trick.[277][278] In the final match of the group stage, Argentina won 2–0 against Greece to win the group and advance to a second round, meeting Mexico.[279] After defeating Mexico 3–1, however, Argentina was routed by Germany 4–0 in the quarter-finals to go out of the competition.[280] Argentina was ranked fifth in the tournament.[281] After the defeat to Germany, Maradona admitted that he was reconsidering his future as Argentina's coach, stating, "I may leave tomorrow."[282] On 15 July, the AFA said that he would be offered a new four-year deal that would keep him in charge through to the summer of 2014 when Brazil staged the World Cup.[283] On 27 July, however, the AFA announced that its board had unanimously decided not to renew his contract.[284] Afterwards, on 29 July, Maradona claimed that AFA president Julio Grondona and director of national teams (as well as his former Argentine national team and Sevilla coach) Carlos Bilardo had "lied to", "betrayed", and effectively sacked him from the role. He said, "They wanted me to continue, but seven of my staff should not go on, if he told me that, it meant he did not want me to keep working."[285]

Personal life
Family

Having returned to his Catholic faith, Maradona donated a signed Argentina jersey to Pope Francis, and it is kept in one of the Vatican Museums.
Born to a Roman Catholic family, his parents were Diego Maradona Senior and Dalma Salvadora Franco. Maradona married long-time fiancée Claudia Villafañe on 7 November 1989 in Buenos Aires,[286] and they had two daughters, Dalma Nerea (born 2 April 1987) and Gianinna Dinorah (born 16 May 1989), by whom he became a grandfather in 2009 after she married Sergio Agüero (now divorced).[287]

Maradona and Villafañe divorced in 2004. Daughter Dalma has since asserted that the divorce was the best solution for all as her parents remained on friendly terms. They travelled together to Naples for a series of homages in June 2005 and were seen together on other occasions, including the Argentina games during 2006 World Cup.[288] During the divorce proceedings, Maradona admitted that he was the father of Diego Sinagra (born in Naples on 20 September 1986). The Italian courts had already ruled so in 1993, after Maradona refused to undergo DNA tests to prove or disprove his paternity. Diego Junior met Maradona for the first time in May 2003 after tricking his way onto a golf course in Italy where Maradona was playing.[289] Sinagra is now a footballer playing in Italy.[290]

After the divorce, Claudia embarked on a career as a theatre producer, and Dalma sought an acting career; she previously had expressed her desire to attend the Actors Studio West in Los Angeles.[291][292]

Maradona's relationship with his immediate family was a close one. In a 1990 interview with Sports Illustrated, he showed phone bills where he had spent a minimum of $15,000 US per month calling his parents and siblings.[293] Maradona's mother, Dalma, died on 19 November 2011. He was in Dubai at the time, and desperately tried to fly back in time to see her, but was too late. She was 81 years old. His father, "Don" Diego, died on 25 June 2015 at age 87.[294]

In 2014, Maradona was accused of assaulting his girlfriend, Rocío Oliva, allegations which he denied.[295][296] In 2017, he gifted her a house in Bella Vista, but in December 2018 they split up.[297] Maradona's great-nephew Hernán López is also a professional footballer.[298]

Drug abuse and health problems

Maradona at the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia, where he was treated by paramedics after collapsing following Argentina's victory over Nigeria[299]
From the mid-1980s until 2004, Maradona was addicted to cocaine. He allegedly began using the drug in Barcelona in 1983.[300] By the time he was playing for Napoli, he had a full-blown addiction, which interfered with his ability to play football.[301] In the midst of his drug crisis in 1991, Maradona was asked by journalists if the hit song "Mi enfermedad" (lit. 'My Disease') was dedicated to him.[302] Maradona was banned from football in both 1991 and 1994 for abusing drugs.[303]

Maradona had a tendency to put on weight and suffered increasingly from obesity, at one point weighing 280 lb (130 kg). He was obese from the end of his playing career until undergoing gastric bypass surgery in a clinic in Cartagena, Colombia, on 6 March 2005. His surgeon said that Maradona would follow a liquid diet for three months in order to return to his normal weight.[304] When Maradona resumed public appearances shortly thereafter, he displayed a notably thinner figure.[305]

On 29 March 2007, Maradona was readmitted to a hospital in Buenos Aires. He was treated for hepatitis and effects of alcohol abuse and was released on 11 April, but readmitted two days later.[306] In the following days, there were constant rumours about his health, including three false claims of his death within a month.[307] After being transferred to a psychiatric clinic specializing in alcohol-related problems, Maradona was discharged on 7 May.[308] On 8 May, Maradona appeared on Argentine television and stated that he had quit drinking and had not used drugs in two and a half years.[309] During the 2018 World Cup match between Argentina and Nigeria, Maradona was shown on television cameras behaving extremely erratically, with an abundance of white residue visible on the glass in front of his seat in the stands. The smudges could have been fingerprints, and he later blamed his behaviour on consuming lots of wine.[310] In January 2019, Maradona underwent surgery after a hernia caused internal bleeding in his stomach.[311]

Political views

Maradona (right) presenting a signed jersey to the former President of Argentina Néstor Kirchner in December 2007
Maradona was ideologically left-wing.[312] He supported the establishment of an independent Palestinian state and condemned Israel's military strikes in the Gaza Strip during the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict, saying: "What Israel is doing to the Palestinians is shameful."[313] He became friends with Cuban president Fidel Castro while receiving treatment on the island, with Castro stating, "Diego is a great friend and very noble, too. There's also no question he's a wonderful athlete and has maintained a friendship with Cuba to no material gain of his own."[86] Maradona had a portrait of Castro tattooed on his left leg and one of Fidel's second in command, fellow Argentine Che Guevara on his right arm.[314] In his autobiography, El Diego, he dedicated the book to various people, including Castro. He wrote: "To Fidel Castro and, through him, all the Cuban people."[315] In 1990, he visited Lenin's Mausoleum in Red Square.[316]


Maradona, then-president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and Evo Morales, at the funeral of former President of Argentina Néstor Kirchner, 28 October 2010
Maradona voiced support for Bolivia's president Evo Morales[317] and was also a supporter of former Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez. In 2005, he came to Venezuela to meet Chávez, who received him in the presidential Miraflores Palace. After the meeting, Maradona said that he had come to meet a "great man" (un grande, which can also mean "a big man", in Spanish), but had instead met a gigantic man (un gigante). He also stated, "I believe in Chávez, I am a Chavista. Everything Fidel does, everything Chávez does, for me is the best."[318] Maradona was Chávez's guest of honour at the opening game of the 2007 Copa América held in Venezuela.[319] In a 2017 interview, Maradona praised Russian president Vladimir Putin and considered him, along with Chavez and Castro, to be among the best political leaders in the world, stating: "Putin is a man who can bring peace to many in this world. He’s a phenomenon; simply a phenomenon".[320]

Many sportsmen claim to be champions of the people, but Maradona's populism is underwritten by his itinerary — the proletarian strongholds of Buenos Aires, Naples, and now Havana.

— Martin Amis writing for The Guardian, 2004.[321]
In 2004, Maradona participated in a protest against the U.S.-led war in Iraq.[312] Maradona declared his opposition to what he identified as imperialism, particularly during the 2005 Summit of the Americas in Mar del Plata, Argentina. There he protested George W. Bush's presence in Argentina, wearing a T-shirt labelled "STOP BUSH" (with the "s" in "Bush" being replaced with a swastika) and referring to Bush as "human garbage".[322][323] In August 2007, Maradona went further, making an appearance on Chávez's weekly television show Aló Presidente and saying, "I hate everything that comes from the United States. I hate it with all my strength."[324] By December 2008, Maradona seemed to adopt a more positive U.S. attitude and expressed admiration for Bush's successor, then-President-elect Barack Obama, for whom he had great expectations.[228] However, in 2017, Maradona was critical of President Donald Trump and called him "a cartoon character".[325]

"I asked myself, 'Who is this man? Who is this footballing magician, this Sex Pistol of international football, this cocaine victim who kicked the habit, looked like Falstaff and was as weak as spaghetti?' If Andy Warhol had still been alive, he would have definitely put Maradona alongside Marilyn Monroe and Mao Tse-tung. I'm convinced that if he hadn't been a footballer, he'd've become a revolutionary."

—Emir Kusturica, film director[86]
With his poor shanty town (villa miseria) upbringing, Maradona cultivated a man-of-the-people persona.[326] During a meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican in 1987, they clashed on the issue of wealth disparity, with Maradona stating, "I argued with him because I was in the Vatican and I saw all these golden ceilings and afterwards I heard the Pope say the Church was worried about the welfare of poor kids. Sell your ceiling then, amigo, do something!"[326] In September 2014, Maradona met with Pope Francis in Rome, crediting Francis for inspiring him to return to religion after many years away; he stated: "We should all imitate Pope Francis. If each one of us gives something to someone else, no one in the world would be starving."[327]

In December 2007, Maradona presented a signed shirt with a message of support to the people of Iran: it is displayed in the Iranian Ministry of Foreign Affairs' museum.[328] In April 2013, Maradona visited the tomb of Hugo Chávez and urged Venezuelans to elect the late leader's designated successor, Nicolás Maduro, to continue the socialist leader's legacy; "Continue the struggle," Maradona said on television.[329] Maradona attended Maduro's final campaign rally in Caracas, signing footballs and kicking them to the crowd, and presented Maduro with an Argentina jersey.[329] Having visited Chávez's tomb with Maradona, Maduro said, "Speaking with Diego was very emotional because comandante Chávez also loved him very much."[329] Maradona participated and danced at the electoral campaign rally during the 2018 presidential elections in Venezuela.[330][331] During the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis, the Mexican Football Federation fined him for violating their code of ethics and dedicating a team victory to Nicolás Maduro.[332]


Maradona (center) visiting Argentina's new president Alberto Fernández (right) in December 2019
Maradona in his 2000 autobiography Yo Soy El Diego, linked the "Hand of God" goal against England at the 1986 World Cup to the Falklands War: "Although we had said before the game that football had nothing to do with the Malvinas [Falklands] War, we knew they had killed a lot of Argentine boys there, killed them like little birds. And this was revenge."[333] In October 2015, Maradona thanked Queen Elizabeth II and the Houses of Parliament in London for giving him the chance to provide "true justice" as head of an organization designed to help young children.[334] In a video released on his official Facebook page, Maradona confirmed he would accept their nomination for him to become Latin American director for the non-governmental organization Football for Unity.[334]

Failure to pay tax
In March 2009, Italian officials announced that Maradona still owed the Italian government €37 million in local taxes, €23.5 million of which was accrued interest on his original debt. They reported that at that point, Maradona had paid only €42,000, two luxury watches and a set of earrings.[335][336] He was posthumously cleared of the accusations in January 2024 by the Supreme Court of Cassation.[337]

Death
On 2 November 2020, Maradona was admitted to a hospital in La Plata, supposedly for psychological reasons. A representative of the ex-footballer said his condition was not serious.[338] A day later, he underwent emergency brain surgery to treat a subdural hematoma.[339] He was released on 12 November after successful surgery and was supervised by doctors as an outpatient.[340] On 25 November, at the age of 60, Maradona suffered cardiac arrest and died in his sleep at his home in Dique Luján, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina.[341][342] Maradona's coffin – draped in Argentina's national flag and three Maradona number 10 shirts (Argentinos Juniors, Boca Juniors and Argentina) – lay in state at the Presidential Palace, the Casa Rosada, with mourners filing past his coffin.[343] On 26 November, Maradona's wake, which was attended by tens of thousands of people, was cut short by his family as his coffin was relocated from the rotunda of the Presidential Palace after fans took over an inner courtyard and also clashed with police.[344][345] The same day, a private funeral service was held and Maradona was buried next to his parents at the Jardín de Bella Vista cemetery in Bella Vista, Buenos Aires.[346]

Tributes
"I have lost a great friend and the world has lost a legend. There's still so much to be said, but for now, may God give strength to his relatives. One day I hope we can play football together in heaven."

— Pelé paying tribute following Maradona's death[347]
In a statement on social media, the Argentine Football Association expressed "its deepest sorrow for the death of our legend", adding: "You will always be in our hearts."[348] President Alberto Fernández announced three days of national mourning.[349] UEFA and CONMEBOL announced that every match in the Champions League, Europa League, Copa Libertadores, and Copa Sudamericana would hold a moment of silence prior to kickoff.[350][351] Boca Juniors' game was postponed in respect to Maradona.[352] Subsequently, other confederations around the world followed suit, with every fixture observing a minute of silence, starting with the AFC Champions League's fixtures.[353] In addition to the minute of silence in Serie A, an image of Maradona was projected on stadium screens in the 10th minute of play.[354]

In Naples, the Stadio San Paolo—officially renamed Stadio Diego Armando Maradona on 4 December 2020—was illuminated at night in honour of Maradona, with numerous fans gathering outside the stadium placing murals and paintings as a tribute. Both Napoli owner Aurelio De Laurentiis and the mayor of Naples Luigi de Magistris expressed their desire to rename their stadium after Maradona, which was unanimously approved by Naples City Council.[73] Prior to Napoli's Europa League match against Rijeka the day after Maradona's death, all of the Napoli players wore shirts with "Maradona 10" on the back of them, before observing a minute of silence.[355] Figures in the sport from every continent around the world also paid tribute to him.[347][356][357] Celebrities and other sports people outside football also paid tribute to Maradona.[358][359][360][361][362]

On 27 November 2020, the Aditya School of Sports in Barasat, Kolkata, India named their cricket stadium after Maradona.[363] Three years earlier Maradona had conducted a workshop with 100 kids in the stadium and played a charity match at the same venue with former Indian cricket captain, Sourav Ganguly.[363] The AFA announced that the 2020 Copa de la Liga Profesional, which is the debut season of Copa de la Liga Profesional, would be renamed Copa Diego Armando Maradona.[364] On 28 November, Pakistan Football Federation's main cup PFF National Challenge Cup honoured Maradona along with Wali Mohammad. In a rugby union test match between Argentina and New Zealand on 28 November, as the New Zealand team lined up to perform the haka their captain Sam Cane presented a black jersey with Maradona's name and his number 10.[365][366] On 29 November, compatriot Lionel Messi scored in Barcelona's 4–0 home win over Osasuna in La Liga, dedicating his goal to Maradona by revealing a Newell's Old Boys shirt worn by the latter under his own, and subsequently pointing to the sky.[367]

On 30 November, after Boca Juniors opened the scoring against Newell's Old Boys at La Bombonera, the club's players paid an emotional tribute by laying a Maradona jersey in front of his private suite where his daughter Dalma was present.[368]

Aftermath
In May 2021, seven medical professionals were charged with homicide over Maradona's death, in violation of their duties, and could face between eight and 25 years in prison if convicted.[369] On 25 June, psychiatrist Agustina Cosachov was summoned by the Prosecution Office of San Isidro and faced a formal questioning, where she agreed to answer more than 100 queries regarding the medical treatment given to Maradona in that medical field.[370][371] After seven hours of questioning, Cosachov's lawyer Vadim Mischanchuk addressed the press and denied that Cosachov's prescription medication could have worsened Maradona's heart condition, and Cosachov further denied any responsibility in the death.[372] On 28 June, multiple arrest warrants were requested by a plaintiff lawyer against Cosachov, personal doctor Leopoldo Luque, psychologist Carlos Díaz, and doctor Nancy Forlini in direct connection with Maradona's alleged negligent death.[373] On 1 July, the prosecutors in the case refused to ask a judge to issue arrest warrants against all the aforementioned professionals, on the basis that they considered the request had been a media stunt ("incursión mediática") for the case, coinciding with personal doctor Luque's interrogation.[374][375]

In June 2022, a judge ruled that eight medical personnel should face trial for criminal negligence and homicide in regards to Maradona's death.[376][377][378]

On 18 April 2023, the Court of Appeals and Guarantees of San Isidro upheld the June 2022 ruling where eight medical personnel, including physician Luque and psychiatrist Cosachov, should face trial on the charge of "simple homicide with malice aforethought". The accused face between eight and 25 years in prison if found guilty.[379]

In September 2024, a criminal court in San Isidro, set the trial date for Luque, Cosachov, and other medical personnel to start on 11 March 2025.[380]

In popular culture
Main article: New Maradona

Graffiti of Maradona. His nickname D10S alludes to his playing number and the Spanish word for God.[381]
In Argentina, Maradona is considered an icon. Concerning the idolatry that exists in his country, former teammate Jorge Valdano said:

At the time that Maradona retired from active football, he left Argentina traumatized. Maradona was more than just a great footballer. He was a special compensation factor for a country that in a few years lived through several military dictatorships and social frustrations of all kinds. Maradona offered to Argentines a way out of their collective frustration, and that's why people there love him as a divine figure.[382]

In leading his nation to the 1986 World Cup, and in particular his performance and two goals in the quarter-final against England, Guillem Balagué writes: "That Sunday in Mexico City, the world saw one man single-handedly – in more than one sense of the phrase – lift the mood of a depressed and downtrodden nation into the stratosphere. With two goals in the space of four minutes, he allowed them to dare to dream that they, like him, could be the best in the world. He did it first by nefarious and then spellbindingly brilliant means. In those moments, he went from star player to legend."[42]

Since 1986, it has been common for Argentines abroad to hear Maradona's name as a token of recognition, even in remote places.[41] The Tartan Army sing a version of the Hokey Cokey in honour of the Hand of God goal against England.[383] In Argentina, Maradona is often talked about in terms reserved for legends. In the Argentine film El hijo de la novia ("Son of the Bride"), somebody who impersonates a Catholic priest says to a bar patron, "They idolized him and then crucified him." When a friend scolds him for taking the prank too far, the fake priest retorts, "But I was talking about Maradona." He is the subject of the film El camino de San Diego, though he himself only appears in archive footage.[384]

Maradona was included in many cameos in the Argentine comic book El Cazador de Aventuras. After the closing of it, the authors started a new short-lived comic book titled El Die, using Maradona as the main character. Maradona has had several online Flash games that are entirely dedicated to his legacy.[385] In Rosario, Argentina, locals organized the parody religion of the "Church of Maradona". The organization reformulates many elements from Christian tradition, such as Christmas or prayers, reflecting instead details from Maradona. It had 200 founding members, and tens of thousands more have become members via the church's official web site.[386]


Maradona (middle) with Queen during the rock band's 1981 South American tour
Many Argentine artists performed songs in tribute to Diego, such as "La Mano de Dios" by El Potro Rodrigo, "Maradona" by Andrés Calamaro, "Para siempre Diego" (Diego Forever) by Los Ratones Paranoicos, "Francotirador" (Sniper) by Attaque 77, "Maradona Blues" by Charly García, "Santa Maradona" (Saint Maradona) by Mano Negra, and "La Vida Tómbola" by Manu Chao, among others. There are also other films, such as: Maradona, La Mano de Dios (Maradona, the Hand of God), Amando a Maradona (Loving Maradona), and Maradona by Kusturica.[239] In March 1981, Queen were introduced to Maradona backstage during their concert at the Vélez Sarsfield Stadium.[387]

By 1982, Maradona had become one of the biggest sports stars in the world and had endorsements with many companies, including Puma and Coca-Cola, earning him an additional $1.5 million per year on top of his club salary.[388] In 1982, he featured in a World Cup commercial for Coca-Cola, and a Japanese commercial for Puma.[388] In 1984 he earned $7m a year at Napoli, and sponsorships included $5m from Hitachi.[321] In 1984, a poll from IMG named Maradona the best known person in the world.[321] In 2010 he appeared in a commercial for French fashion house Louis Vuitton, indulging in a game of table football with fellow World Cup winners Pelé and Zinedine Zidane.[389] Maradona featured in the music video to the 2010 World Cup song "Waka Waka" by Shakira, with footage shown of him celebrating Argentina winning the 1986 World Cup.[390]


Banners depicting Maradona – such as this where he features alongside Lionel Messi at the 2018 World Cup in Russia – often appear at Argentina games.
A 2006 television commercial for Brazilian soft drink Guaraná Antarctica portrayed Maradona as a member of the Brazil national team, including wearing the yellow jersey and singing the Brazilian national anthem with Brazilian players Ronaldo and Kaká.[391] Later on in the commercial he wakes up realizing it was a nightmare after having too much of the drink. This generated some controversy in the Argentine media after its release (although the commercial was not supposed to air for the Argentine market, fans could see it online). Maradona replied that he had no problem wearing the Brazilian national squad jersey despite Argentina and Brazil's tense football rivalry, but that he would refuse to wear the shirt of River Plate, Boca Juniors' traditional rival.[392] There is a documented phenomenon of Brazilians being named in honour of Maradona,[393] an example being footballer Diego Costa.[394]

In 2017, Maradona featured as a legendary player in the football video games FIFA 18 and Pro Evolution Soccer 2018.[395] In 2019, a documentary film titled Diego Maradona was released by Academy Award and BAFTA Award winning filmmaker Asif Kapadia, director of Amy (on singer Amy Winehouse) and Senna (on motor racing driver Ayrton Senna). Kapadia stated that " ...Maradona is the third part of a trilogy about child geniuses and fame."[396] He added, "...I was fascinated by his journey, wherever he went there were moments of incredible brilliance and drama. He was a leader, taking his teams to the very top, but also many lows in his career. He was always the little guy fighting against the system... and he was willing to do anything, to use all of his cunning and intelligence to win."[397]

Career statistics
Maradona made 680 appearances and scored 345 goals for club and country combined, with a goalscoring average of 0.51.

Club
Appearances and goals by club, season and competition
Club	Season	League	National cup[a]	Continental	Other	Total
Division	Apps	Goals	Apps	Goals	Apps	Goals	Apps	Goals	Apps	Goals
Argentinos Juniors[54][398]	1976	Argentine Primera División	11	2	–	–	–	11	2
1977	Argentine Primera División	49	19	–	–	–	49	19
1978	Argentine Primera División	35	26	–	–	–	35	26
1979	Argentine Primera División	26	26	–	–	–	26	26
1980	Argentine Primera División	45	43	–	–	–	45	43
Total	166	116	–	–	–	166	116
Boca Juniors[54][398]	1981	Argentine Primera División	40	28	–	–	–	40	28
Barcelona[54]	1982–83	La Liga	20	11	5	3	4[b]	5	6[c]	4	35	23
1983–84	La Liga	16	11	4	1	3[b]	3	–	23	15
Total	36	22	9	4	7	8	6	4	58	38
Napoli[54]	1984–85	Serie A	30	14	6	3	–	–	36	17
1985–86	Serie A	29	11	2	2	–	–	31	13
1986–87	Serie A	29	10	10	7	2[d]	0	–	41	17
1987–88	Serie A	28	15	9	6	2[e]	0	–	39	21
1988–89	Serie A	26	9	12	7	12[d]	3	–	50	19
1989–90	Serie A	28	16	3	2	5[d]	0	–	36	18
1990–91	Serie A	18	6	3	2	4[e]	2	1[f]	0	26	10
Total	188	81	45	29	25	5	1	0	259	115
Sevilla[54]	1992–93	La Liga	26	5	4	2	–	–	30	7
Newell's Old Boys[54][398]	1993–94	Argentine Primera División	5	0	–	–	–	5	0
Boca Juniors[54][398]	1995–96	Argentine Primera División	24	5	–	–	–	24	5
1996–97	Argentine Primera División	1	0	–	–	1[g]	0	2	0
1997–98	Argentine Primera División	5	2	–	–	–	5	2
Total	70	35	–	–	1	0	71	35
Career total	491	259	58	35	32	13	8	4	589	311
 Includes Copa del Rey, Coppa Italia
 Appearances in European Cup Winners' Cup
 Appearances in Copa de la Liga
 Appearances in UEFA Cup
 Appearances in European Cup
 Appearance in Supercoppa Italiana
 Appearance in Supercopa Libertadores
International
Further information: List of international goals scored by Diego Maradona
Appearances and goals by national team, year and competition
Team	Year	Competitive	Friendly	Total
Apps	Goals	Apps	Goals	Apps	Goals
Argentina U20[399]	1977	3[a]	0	–	3	0
1978	–	–	–
1979	11[b]	7	1	1	12	8
Total	14	7	1	1	15	8
Argentina[54][85]	1977	–	3	0	3	0
1978	–	1	0	1	0
1979	2[c]	1	6	2	8	3
1980	–	10	7	10	7
1981	2[d]	1	–	2	1
1982	5[e]	2	5	0	10	2
1983	–	–	–
1984	–	–	–
1985	6[f]	3	4	3	10	6
1986	7[g]	5	3	2	10	7
1987	4[h]	3	2	1	6	4
1988	2[i]	1	1	0	3	1
1989	6[j]	0	1	0	7	0
1990	7[k]	0	3	1	10	1
1991	–	–	–
1992	–	–	–
1993	3[l]	0	1	0	4	0
1994	2[m]	1	5	1	7	2
Total	46	17	45	17	91	34
Career total	60	24	46	18	106	42
Notes

 Appearances in the 1977 South American U-20 Championship
 Five appearances and one goal in the 1979 South American U-20 Championship, six appearances and six goals in the 1979 FIFA World Youth Championship
 Appearances in the 1979 Copa América
 Appearances in the 1980 Mundialito
 Appearances in the 1982 World Cup
 Appearances in the 1986 FIFA World Cup qualification
 Appearances in the 1986 World Cup
 Appearances in the 1987 Copa América
 Appearances in the Four Nations Tournament
 Appearances in the 1989 Copa América
 Appearances in the 1990 World Cup
 One appearance in the 1993 Artemio Franchi Cup, two appearances in the 1994 FIFA World Cup qualification
 Appearances in the 1994 World Cup
Managerial statistics
Team	From	To	Record
G	W	D	L	Win %
Textil Mandiyú[citation needed]	January 1994	June 1994	12	1	6	5	8.33
Racing Club[citation needed]	May 1995	November 1995	11	2	6	3	18.18
Argentina[citation needed]	November 2008	July 2010	24	18	0	6	75.00
Al-Wasl[citation needed]	May 2011	July 2012	23	11	3	9	47.83
Fujairah[citation needed]	April 2017	April 2018	11	7	3	1	63.64
Dorados[citation needed]	September 2018	June 2019	38	20	9	9	52.63
Gimnasia de La Plata[citation needed]	September 2019	November 2020	21	8	4	9	38.10
Total	140	67	31	42	47.86
Honours
Boca Juniors[400]

Argentine Primera División: 1981 Metropolitano
Barcelona[400]

Copa del Rey: 1982–83
Copa de la Liga: 1983
Napoli[400]

Serie A: 1986–87, 1989–90
Coppa Italia: 1986–87
Supercoppa Italiana: 1990
UEFA Cup: 1988–89
Argentina U20

FIFA World Youth Championship: 1979[400]
Argentina

FIFA World Cup: 1986[400]
Artemio Franchi Cup: 1993[401]
Individual


Maradona's Golden Foot award in "The Champions Promenade" on the seafront of the Principality of Monaco
Argentine Primera División top scorers: 1978 Metropolitano, 1979 Metropolitano, 1979 Nacional, 1980 Metropolitano, 1980 Nacional[402]
FIFA World Youth Championship Golden Ball: 1979[83]
FIFA World Youth Championship Silver Shoe: 1979[83]
Olimpia de Oro: 1979, 1986[403]
Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year: 1979, 1986, 1987[404][405][406]
Argentine Football Writers' Footballer of the Year: 1979, 1980, 1981, 1986[407]
El Mundo South American Footballer of the Year: 1979, 1980, 1986, 1989, 1990, 1992[402][408][409][410][411]
El Gráfico Footballer of the Americas:[a] 1980, 1981[412][413]
Guerin Sportivo World All-star Team: 1980, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1985[404][414][415][405]
Eric Batty's World XI: 1984, 1987[416]
Serie A Team of The Year: 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988[417]
Guerin d'Oro (Serie A Footballer of the Year): 1985[418]
Onze de Onze: 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989[419]
FIFA World Cup Golden Ball: 1986[402]
FIFA World Cup Silver Shoe: 1986[420]
FIFA World Cup Most Assists: 1986[421]
L'Équipe Champion of Champions: 1986[422]
La Gazzetta dello Sport Athlete of the Year: 1986[423]
Agence France-Presse Athlete of the Year: 1986[423]
Associated Press Athlete of the Year: 1986[423]
United Press International Athlete of the Year: 1986[424]
Corriere dello Sport Athlete of the Year: 1986[425]
Onze d'Or: 1986, 1987[419]
La Gazzetta dello Sport Footballer of the Year: 1987, 1988[426][427]
Capocannoniere (Serie A top scorer): 1987–88[402]
Coppa Italia top scorer: 1987–88[428]
FIFA World Cup Bronze Ball: 1990[402]
El País Ideal Team of the America's: 1993, 1995[429]
FIFA World Cup All-Time Team: 1994[430]
Ballon d'Or for services to football (France Football): 1995[431]
World Team of the 20th Century: 1998[402]
World Soccer magazine's Greatest Players of the 20th century: (#2) 1999[209]
Argentine Sports Writers' Sportsman of the Century: 1999[432]
Marca Leyenda: 1999[433]
Number 10 retired by Napoli football team as a recognition to his contribution to the club: 2000[434]
FIFA Player of the Century: 2000[402]
FIFA Goal of the Century (for his second goal against England in 1986 FIFA World Cup quarter-final): 2002[402]
FIFA World Cup Dream Team: 2002[435]
Golden Foot: 2003, as football legend[436]
FIFA 100 Greatest Living Players: 2004[402]
Argentine Senate "Domingo Faustino Sarmiento" recognition for lifetime achievement: 2005[437]
Greatest Footballers in World Cup History: No. 1, by The Times, 2010[438]
Best Athlete in History: No. 1, by Corriere dello Sport – Stadio, 2012[439]
Player of the 20th Century, by Globe Soccer Awards: 2012[440][441][442]
World Soccer magazine's Greatest XI of All Time: 2013[443]
Italian Football Hall of Fame: 2014[444]
AFA Team of All Time: 2015[445]
Greatest Football Players of All-Time: No. 1 by FourFourTwo magazine, 2017[186]
Greatest Football Players in World Cup History: No. 1, by FourFourTwo magazine, 2018[214]
Napoli all-time Top Scorer (1991–2017)[35][56]
L'Équipe's top 50 South-American footballers in history: #2[446]
International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS) Legends[447]
Ballon d'Or Dream Team: 2020[448]
IFFHS All-time Men's Dream Team: 2021[449]
IFFHS South America Men's Team of All Time: 2021[450]
Notes

 El Grafico South American Footballer of the Year was an award that included over 130 journalists/tv broadcasters from South America
Works
Maradona, Diego Armando (2000). Yo Soy el Diego [I Am the Diego] (in Spanish). Planeta Pub. Corp. ISBN 84-08036-74-2.
Maradona, Diego (2016). México 86 : así ganamos la copa : mi mundial, mi verdad (in Spanish) (1st ed.). Barcelona: Debate. ISBN 978-84-9992-627-8. OCLC 953395867.
See also
icon	Association football portal
flag	Argentina portal
List of association football families
List of most valuable celebrity memorabilia
1989 warm up to Live Is Life
References
 "Diego Armando Maradona Franco stats". FC Barcelona. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2024.
 "Small is beautiful". FIFA. 8 May 2009. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020.
 Warrington, Mark WhiteContributions from Declan; Haugstad, Thore; Yokhin, Michael; Murray, Andrew; Stafford-Bloor, Seb; Spurling, Jon; Hess, Alex; Alves, Marcus; published, Alex Reid (5 September 2023). "Ranked! The 100 best football players of all time". fourfourtwo.com. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 10 November 2023.
 Dart, James; Doyle, Paul; Hill, Jon (12 April 2006). "The greatest rags-to-riches stories ever". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 March 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Don Diego, father of Maradona, dies in Argentine clinic". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2022.
 "Hugo Maradona, younger brother of Diego, dies at 52". AP News. 28 December 2021. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2022.
 Paul Doyle (11 July 2012). "Does Diego Maradona have a more famous brother?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 25 November 2022.
 "El gallego Maradona". Faro de Vigo. 26 November 2020. Archived from the original on 4 December 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2021.
 Welch, Julie (25 November 2020). "Diego Maradona obituary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 "Sinagra: Maradona ha origini italiane? Vi racconto cosa mi diceva Diego. Messi...". AreaNapoli.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022.
 "Los desconocidos orígenes croatas de Diego Maradona". www.ambito.com. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
 "El volcánico partido de Maradona en Croacia: visita a la tumba de Petrovic, 0 a 0 arreglado y amenaza de renunciar al Mundial - TyC Sports". www.tycsports.com (in Spanish). 13 December 2022. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022.
 "Diego Armando Maradona er af kroatisk og galicisk afstamning". MyHeritage-blog. 13 December 2022.
 "Diego Maradona - I was there". FIFA. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
 "Diego Maradona". Biography. Archived from the original on 15 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 "Lost soccer talents: 6 players who sparked too early". 90soccer.com. 23 June 2022. Archived from the original on 30 August 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2022.
 "The story of Francis Cornejo". eldestapeweb.com (in Spanish). 28 October 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022.
 "The Hand of God". Archived from the original on 17 February 2006.
 "Argentinos Juniors: The 'Argentinean Ajax'". BBC. 2 May 2019. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2022.
 "Maradona hails 'inspirational' Best". RTÉ Sport. 26 November 2005. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Football's Greatest – Rivelino". Pitch International LLP. 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2014
 "A Summary of Maradona's Life". vivadiego.com. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013.
 "Maradona. Así empezó todo". El Gráfico (in Spanish). 20 October 2021. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Diego, el de Argentinos". Clarín (in Spanish). 10 April 2013. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.
 "Murió Juan Domingo "el Chacho" Cabrera". lavoz.com.ar (in Spanish). 4 September 2007. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 22 June 2019.
 "Los primeros gritos de D10S". laseleccion.com.ar (in Spanish). 14 November 2012. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. on La Selección website.
 "1978: el día que Diego se quedó sin Mundial". El Grafico. 19 May 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
 "El día que el 'gordito' se transformó en verdugo de Boca y del Loco Gatti". EL Grafico. 28 October 2010. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
 Arcucchi, Daniel (22 February 2011). "Aquella jugada que llevó a Maradona a Boca" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 30 September 2015.
 Diego Maradona (1 May 2004). Yo Soy El Diego, autobiography of Diego Armando Maradona. Booket. ISBN 9871144628.
 "Un mes sin el 10. Maradona era de Independiente, quiso jugar en River, terminó enojado con Boca, fue DT de Racing y admiraba a San Lorenzo". La Nación (in Spanish). Retrieved 31 January 2022. Ahora lo más firme parece ser lo de Boca. Lo de River quedó un poquito muerto por el ofrecimiento que hizo Aragón Cabrera de ganar lo mismo que Fillol y Passarella, que son los que más ganan. Yo le dije que no tenía problema, Dios quiera que ellos ganen 5 millones de dólares de contrato. Yo no tengo problemas, pero en caso de que me den lo que yo les pido. Y me dijo que no, porque se le iba a hacer muy embromado todo para poder pagarles a todos... Las tratativas las hace Jorge, pero me entero de todo.
 "25 años de romance". Clarín (in Spanish). 22 February 2006. Archived from the original on 4 September 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Maradona por Maradona". Clarín (in Spanish). 24 September 2000. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020.
 Gorgazzi, Osvaldo José. "Argentina 1981 - Campeonato Metropolitano". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2023.
 "The Albiceleste underdog who conquered the world". FIFA. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014.
 Burns, Jimmy (31 July 2009). Barca: A People's Passion. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 251.
 "Life and crimes of Diego Armando Maradona" Archived 28 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine. The Telegraph. Retrieved 15 October 2015
 "Real Madrid 0 Barcelona 3: Bernabeu forced to pay homage as Ronaldinho soars above the galacticos" Archived 9 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine. The Independent. Retrieved 29 November 2013
 "30 years since Maradona stunned the Santiago Bernabéu". FC Barcelona. 25 June 1013. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Kwesi O'Mard, Marcus (21 November 2015). "Real Madrid Fans Applaud Barcelona's Andres Iniesta In 'El Clasico'". NESN. Archived from the original on 2 January 2021. Retrieved 28 January 2016.
 "That's one hell of a diet, Diego". The Observer. 8 January 2006. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona dies: Guillem Balague on 'the magician, the cheat, the god, the flawed genius'". BBC Sport. BBC. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 Murray, Scott (5 December 2008). "Diego Maradona gives hot, hot heat to The Butcher of Bilbao". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Luca Caioli (2013). "Messi: The Inside Story of the Boy Who Became a Legend"
 Jimmy Burns. (2011). "Maradona: The Hand of God". pp.121–122. A&C Black
 "Backgrounder: Diego Maradona". CBC Sports. Archived from the original on 28 June 2010.
 "Snapshot: Maradona is toast of the town after signing for Napoli". The Times. 20 February 2012. Archived from the original on 10 September 2014. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Cristiano Ronaldo welcomed by 80,000 fans at Real Madrid unveiling". The Guardian. London. 6 July 2009. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Carter, Jon (9 March 2012). "Maradona brings success to Napoli". ESPN. Archived from the original on 10 October 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Clemente A. Lisi (28 March 2011). A History of the World Cup: 1930–2010. Scarecrow Press. p. 193.
 Sellitti, Nicola (9 February 2016). "Bruscolotti, una vita in azzurro: "Napoli, ricorda quella partita dell'86"". la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 7 April 2016.
 "Diego Maradona » Coppa Italia 1986/1987". worldfootball.net. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
 Richardson, James (3 April 2007). "Serie A's comeback kid eyes another miracle". Guardian Unlimited. Archived from the original on 10 February 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2016.
 De Calò, Alessandro (2011). Il calcio di Maradona ai raggi X (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. pp. 94–95.
 Shepherd, Robert (16 February 2014). "Diego Maradona Has Appealed to European Union". Guardian Liberty Voice. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Marek Hamsik breaks Diego Maradona's Napoli scoring record". ESPN FC. 23 December 2017. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 23 December 2017.
 "Diego Maradona » Coppa Italia 1987/1988". worldfootball.net. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
 "SSC Napoli - Torino FC 2:3 (Coppa Italia 1987/1988, Quarter-finals)". worldfootball.net. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
 "SSC Napoli - Juventus 3:0 (Europa League 1988/1989, Quarter-finals)". worldfootball.net. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
 "Napoli–Stuttgart". UEFA. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 Sica, Jvan (18 April 2019). "Quando il Napoli vinse la Coppa UEFA" (in Italian). L'Ultimo Uomo. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 "1988/89: Maradona leads the way for Napoli". UEFA. 1 June 1989. Archived from the original on 24 June 2010. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 Mocciaro, Gaetano (17 May 2016). "17 maggio 1989, Napoli trionfa in Europa: a Stoccarda arriva la Coppa Uefa" (in Italian). Tutto Mercato Web. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 "Franco Baresi: One-on-One". Four Four Two. 1 November 2009. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2015.
 Landolina, Salvatore (4 October 2008). "Maradona and Ronaldo Best Ever". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 7 February 2015.
 "Sports People; Maradona Fined". The New York Times. 13 January 1991. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
 May, John (19 April 2004). "Maradona's fall from grace". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 April 2010. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
 Greengrass, Paul; Follett, Toby (5 July 1994). "After the fall: The World Cup dream is over for Diego Maradona, but there may be worse to come – a little matter of pounds 500,000-worth of smuggled cocaine, and the Naples mafia. Paul Greengrass and Toby Follett report". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 15 November 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
 "Camorra, arrestato il boss amico di Maradona". Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 24 December 2009. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
 Telander, Rick (14 January 2002). "At his best, Diego Maradona can be as graceful as Michael Jordan. At his worst, he can be as disgraceful as John McEnroe. The question is, which Maradona will show for the World Cup?". CNN. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012. Retrieved 1 September 2009.
 Landolina, Salvatore (14 January 2011). "Diego Maradona Backs Ezequiel Lavezzi To Earn Napoli Number 10 Shirt". Goal. Archived from the original on 8 June 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2013.
 "Maradona gives Lavezzi No 10 shirt". football-italia.net. 2 November 2010. Retrieved 20 November 2024.
 Grez, Matias (11 December 2020). "Napoli plays first match at the newly renamed Stadio Diego Armando Maradona". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2020.
 "Sport in Short: Football – Sport". The Independent. UK. 15 July 1992. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 6 May 2011.
 "Maradona 'a main contender to replace Villas-Boas at Tottenham'". Yahoo. 13 December 2013. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014.
 Strong, Gregory (25 November 2020). "Magical Day: A memorable Canadian one-off with the mighty Maradona". thestar.com. Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 "Diego Maradona führt FC Bayern bei Matthäus-Abschied als Kapitän an". SPORT1 (in German). 27 November 2020. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2022.
 Rookwood, Dan (10 November 2001). "Maradona finishes on a personal high". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 29 July 2018.
 Ballestero, Frank (23 November 2001). "Diego Armando Maradona's farewell match". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 "On this day. The legendary Diego Maradona played his first match for the Argentina national team". dailysports.net. 27 February 2024. Retrieved 24 October 2024.
 Diego Maradona at the Encyclopædia Britannica
 "Cosmos Lament The Death of Maradona". www.nycosmos.com. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2024.
 "FIFA World Youth Tournament 1979 Technical Study Report" (PDF). FIFA. pp. 97–109. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2014. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
 MacPherson, Graeme (30 October 2008). "Maradona to receive Hampden welcome". The Herald. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008.
 Pierrend, José Luis (30 July 2001). "Diego Armando Maradona – International Appearances". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 2 November 2001. Retrieved 25 June 2018.
 "Maradona, as others see him". FIFA. 30 October 2010. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020.
 Pierrend, José Luis. "FIFA Under-20 World Championships Awards". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016.
 "World Cup final: Lionel Messi named best player as Kylian Mbappe wins Golden Boot". BBC Sport. 18 December 2022. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2023.
 "1982 – Story of Spain '82". Planet World Cup. Archived from the original on 4 April 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
 Elkin, David (29 May 2014). "Claudio Gentile and the story of Diego Maradona's first World Cup". backpagefootball.com. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 Darby, James (10 June 2010). "Castrol World Cup Legends: Diego Maradona - 1986". Goal. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Brewin, John; Williamson, Martin (10 November 2009). "World Cup 1986". ESPN. Archived from the original on 26 January 2014.
 "1986 FIFA World Cup Mexico: Italy – Argentina". FIFA. Archived from the original on 16 December 2012.
 Burke, Chris (22 June 2016). "30 years on: Maradona's 'hand of God'". UEFA. Archived from the original on 30 August 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "The reason we English dislike Maradona so much is because we've never got over the Falklands War". The Independent. 27 June 2018. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 McCarthy, David (18 November 2008).McCarthy, David (18 November 2008). "Terry Butcher: Maradona robbed England of World Cup glory". Daily Record. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
 Motson, John. Motson's World Cup Extravaganza. Robson Books. p. 103.
 Alexander, Harriet (2 December 2009). "Top 10 World Cup goals". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 August 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona goal voted the FIFA World Cup Goal of the Century". FIFA. 30 May 2002. Archived from the original on 23 May 2012.
 "100 Greatest Sporting Moments – Results". London: Channel 4. 2002. Archived from the original on 4 February 2002. Retrieved 8 August 2019.
 "Diego Maradona: Argentina legend's 'Hand of God' shirt sells for £7.1m at auction". BBC. 4 May 2022. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2022.
 Gammon, Clive (7 July 1986). "Tango Argentino! Superstar Diego Maradona fast-stepped Argentina to the World Cup championship over West Germany in Mexico City". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014.
 "Spain's 2010 conquerors in numbers". FIFA.com. 22 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 June 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2020.
 "Argentina's Road to the World Title" (PDF). fifa.com. FIFA. p. 228. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 "Adidas Golden Ball Previous Winners". FIFA. Archived from the original on 17 May 2012.
 "Pelé and Maradona – two very different number tens". FIFA. 25 January 2001. Archived from the original on 17 July 2014.
 "Maradona was on another level – Zidane". Goal. Archived from the original on 6 December 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
 "Messi's Goal Better Than Maradona's Goal of the Century". worldrec.info. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010.
 "From spectacular to scandalous: Maradona's World Cup legacy" Archived 30 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved 14 May 2014
 Baxter, Kevin (4 July 2014). "Argentina's Lionel Messi still has one man to beat". The Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
 Goff, Steven (4 July 2014). "It's Argentina vs. Belgium in the World Cup, but always Lionel Messi vs. Diego Maradona". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
 Thomas, Russell (6 June 2002). "England's past four World Cup clashes with Argentina". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
 Molinaro, John F. (21 November 2009). "1986 World Cup: The Diego Maradona Show". CBC Sports. Archived from the original on 9 October 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
 Molinaro, John (9 June 2018). "History of the World Cup: 1986 – Maradona puts on a show in Mexico". Sportsnet. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
 "What Maradona and Pele didn't win". The Athletic. 24 June 2024. Retrieved 15 July 2024.
 Brewin, John; Williamson, Martin (10 November 2009). "World Cup 1990". ESPN. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014.
 The Washington Post
 Artemio Franchi Cup details at AFA website
 Verhovek, Sam Howe (July 1994). "After Second Test, Maradona Is Out of World Cup". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 2 February 2017.
 Jensen, Mike (22 July 1994). "From our archives: Diego Maradona scored his last World Cup goal in the United States". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 Hewitt, Steve (6 December 2020). "'Completely electric': How Diego Maradona's legendary Argentina career came to dramatic end at Foxboro Stadium". Boston Herald. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 Sutherland, Ben (26 November 2020). "Diego Maradona: how his genius shone in his last Argentina game". BBC. Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 Heydari, Keyvan Antonio (24 August 1994). "FIFA to Decide Maradona's Status". The Washington Post. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 McCracken, Craig (26 June 2018). "The best ever World Cup match? Romania 3-2 Argentina at USA 94". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 Hylands, Alan. "Diego Maradona - Career History". about.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2009.
 "Argentina's tribute to Maradona". BBC. 9 November 2001. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 "FIFA World Stars Games at a glance" (PDF). FIFA. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 Leme de Arruda, Marcelo (2001). "FIFA XI´s Matches - Full Info". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 Crist, Matthew (8 May 2017). "100 years bore: the arduous and elongated Football League centenary celebrations in 1988". These Football Times. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
 "When the Football League took on the world..." England Memories. 7 August 2015. Archived from the original on 5 November 2019.
 Siregar, Cady (11 June 2019). "What is a false nine? Messi, Hazard & how the attacking role works". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
 Wilson, Jonathan (27 May 2010). "Diego Maradona dominated 1986 World Cup after position switch". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 30 May 2010.
 Adlakha, Manisha (25 June 2010). "Diego Maradona: 'The Soccer Guru'". The Viewspaper. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013.
 Coggin, Stewart. "Diego Maradona – Profile of Soccer Player Diego Maradona". worldsoccer.about.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013.
 Wilson, Jonathan (27 May 2010). "Maradona the coach can learn from experience of Maradona the player". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
 Wilson, Jonathan (19 November 2008). "The Question: is 3–5–2 dead?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 November 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
 Doyle, John (29 June 2018). "Lionel Messi plays for Argentina but he is not a traditional Argentine player". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
 Barra, Allen (12 July 2014). "Germany, Argentina, and What Really Makes a World Cup Team". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 28 June 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
 "La nuova vita del Pibe de Oro Maradona ct dell'Argentina". la Repubblica. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 3 February 2015.
 Houghton, David Patrick (2008). Political Psychology: Situations, Individuals, and Cases. Routledge. p. 43.
 Ratcliffe, Susan (2001). People on People: The Oxford Dictionary of Biographical Quotations. Oxford University Press. p. 234.
 Gullit, Ruud (14 May 2010). "Perfect 10s". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020.
 Khazan, Olga (12 June 2014). "Why Being Short Can Help in Soccer". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2020.
 "Maradona? Really?". Montreal Gazette. 29 October 2008. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020.
 Burns, Jimmy (9 July 2014). "World Cup Legends #1: Diego Maradona". Esquire. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020.
 Yannis, Alex (23 June 1994). "WORLD CUP '94; Maradona Lets Feet Talk for Him". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020.
 Gorney, Cynthia (9 August 1981). "!Maradona!". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020.
 McLeman, Neil (21 March 2012). "Messi's a world treasure says Johan Cruyff". The Mirror. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012.
 Jiang, Allan (25 January 2012). "50 Greatest Dribblers in World Football History". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 23 December 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2017.
 Murray, Scott (15 October 2010). "The Joy of Six: Great dribbles". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2017.
 "We Missed the Premier League, Too: The Legendary Career of Thierry Henry". NBC4 Washington. 24 June 2020. Archived from the original on 29 June 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 Maradona's World Cup magic Archived 23 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine. BBC Sport (19 April 2004). Retrieved 18 August 2006.
 "Recall the best not the worst of Maradona, says David Lacey". The Guardian. 19 April 2004. Archived from the original on 29 June 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 Doyle, Mark (27 March 2020). "Mythbuster: 'Messi is not Maradona' – Did Diego win the World Cup on his own?". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 Lowenstein, Stephen (2009). My First Movie, Take Two: Ten Celebrated Directors Talk About Their First Film. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. xi. ISBN 978-1-4000-7990-2. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
 Ronay, Barney (29 May 2014). "World Cup's top 100 footballers: how to choose between Pelé and Maradona?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 John H Kerr (2004). Kerr, John H (2004). Motivation And Emotion in Sport. Taylor & Francis. p. 2.
 Zavala, Steve (17 August 2017). "Top 20 Soccer Players of All-Time". Medium. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020.
 "Sacchi: "Maradona il più grande Il Milan voleva prenderlo"". Corriere dello Sport – Stadio (in Italian). 30 October 2010. Archived from the original on 26 October 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
 Mora y Araujo, Marcela (18 November 2008). "Does Diego still have the touch of a leader?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Messi lacks Maradona's charisma, claims Batistuta". Four Four Two. 23 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 August 2018. Retrieved 15 August 2018.
 Genta, Carlo (30 October 2008). "Maradona, il ct dei sogni che può vincere il Mondiale". Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 "Enraptured by 'rabonas'". FIFA.com. 24 October 2014. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2016.
 Hackett, Robin (17 January 2013). "The art of rabona". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2016.
 Doyle, Paul (8 March 2006). "Sprechen sie Fußball?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 April 2021. Retrieved 21 April 2021.
 Ferris, Ken (19 June 2010). "Free kick expert Maradona leads by example". Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016.
 "Tension from 12 yards". FIFA.com. 31 July 2009. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2016.
 Hersh, Phil (25 June 1986). "Soccer Celebrates its 'San' Diego". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2020.
 "Kings of the free-kick". FIFA. 2 December 2011. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015.. FIFA.com. Retrieved 20 May 2014
 Matchett, Karl (6 February 2017). "Where Does Lionel Messi Rank Among the Greatest Free-Kick Takers of All Time?". bleacherreport.com. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2019.
 Giancarlo, Galavotti (26 January 1999). "Zola applaude Mihajlovic: "E' il piu' completo"" [Zola applauds Mihajlovic: "He is the most complete"]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020.
 Lara, Lorenzo; Mogollo, Álvaro; Wilson, Emily (20 September 2018). "Messi and the other best freekick takers in football history". Marca. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020.
 "Del Piero? Tira alla Platini". Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 24 October 1995. p. 44. Archived from the original on 6 November 2015.
 Cetta, Luca (19 March 2014). "Free-kick master Pirlo". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 26 June 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020.
 Sanderson, Tom (10 November 2019). "Dead Ball Genius: How Messi Learned From Maradona, Ronaldinho And Deco To Become The Game's Greatest Free-Kick Taker". Forbes. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020.
 Booth, Robert; Jones, Sam (30 October 2008). "El maestro Maradona: football legend to be Argentina manager". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Geoff Tibballs (2003). "Great Sporting Scandals". p. 227. Robson, 2003
 "Maradona scores $1800-a-seat ticket sales, proving the bad boys of sport are hard to match" Archived 5 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 19 May 2014
 "13 June 1990: Diego Maradona's other World Cup handball"". The Guardian. 13 June 2009. Archived from the original on 24 November 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Burns, Jimmy (9 July 2014). "World Cup Legends #1: Diego Maradona". Esquire. Archived from the original on 3 February 2015.
 Burns, Jimmy (15 November 2008). "Argentina coach Diego Maradona writes another chapter in a turbulent life". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Taylor, Chris (9 November 2005). "A Big Hand". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 September 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Burns, Jimmy (18 February 2021). Maradona: The Hand of God. A & C Black. p. 17.
 Azzi, Marco (13 November 2006). "Rabona, ' o tocco magico di Diego" [Rabona, Diego's magic touch]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2016.
 Glanville, Brian (1 April 2010). The Story of the World Cup: The Essential Companion to South Africa 2010. Faber and Faber. p. 320.
 Murray, Andrew (26 September 2017). "FourFourTwo's 100 Greatest Footballers EVER: No.1, Diego Maradona". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2017.
 "Maradona or Pele?". CNN/SI. 10 December 2000. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014.
 "Pele or Maradona, who is the greatest?". BBC Sport. 22 October 2010. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2020.
 Brewin, Joe (25 February 2020). "10 of Diego Maradona's best moments: the greatest player of all time?". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2020.
 Vinay, Adarsh (16 January 2008). "Pelé or Diego Maradona: Who is the Greatest Soccer Player of All Time?". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2020.
 Kane, Desmond (23 March 2016). "The top five players of all time – where does Johan Cruyff rank on our list of greats?". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2020.
 "That's one hell of a diet, Diego". The Guardian. 8 January 2006. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Marino, Giovanni (8 May 2018). "I mille colori di Maradona in bianco e nero". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 "Napoli, Carnevale racconta: "Maradona una volta si presentò un'ora prima di giocare"" (in Italian). sport.sky.it. 12 February 2018. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Corbetta, Vincenzo (4 October 2018). "Bianchi, passione e rigore di un vincente". Brescia Oggi (in Italian). Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2020.
 "Bianchi: "Messi? Gioca in un Barcellona perfetto, mentre Diego..."". Tutto Napoli (in Italian). 9 March 2012. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2020.
 Vecsey, George (27 May 1990). "Soccer's Little Big Man". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 September 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Landolina, Salvatore (10 June 2011). "Diego Maradona made excuses to dodge Napoli training – Luciano Moggi". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Moore, Nick (30 June 2007). "Marcel Desailly: Perfect XI". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Hill, Steve (10 April 2020). "When the poorest city in Italy bought the world's most expensive player: What the Diego Maradona movie teaches us about one of football's greats". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Tyers, Alan (22 March 2020). "Maradona, the magic, the madness: takeaways from Diego Maradona film on Channel 4". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2020.
 Alarcón, Daniel (13 October 2019). "The Tragedy of Diego Maradona, One of Soccer's Greatest Stars". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Gore, Will (27 June 2018). "The reason we English dislike Maradona so much is because we've never got over the Falklands War". The Independent. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 "Germany hammers Argentina 4–0 to reach World Cup semis". CTV News. 3 July 2010. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Pellizzari, Tommaso (29 November 2019). "Diego Maradona, fenomenologia del campione delle contraddizioni". Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 March 2021. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 Agnew, Paddy (18 January 2005). "Evergreen Maldini still the soul of the Rossoneri". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020.
 "Ho pianto per Radice. Maradona il più forte di sempre, ma a Van Basten è stato ancora più difficile prendere la palla". Il Corriere dello Sport (in Italian). 22 November 2018. Archived from the original on 4 November 2019. Retrieved 4 November 2019.
 Westwood, James (28 November 2020). "Ibrahimovic: Maradona's off-field antics don't matter". Goal. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "World Soccer Players of the Century". World Soccer. Archived from the original on 4 April 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2014.
 "FIFA Player of the Century" (PDF). touri.com. 11 December 2000. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 Stokkermans, Karel. "IFFHS' Century Elections". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 "Pelè è più forte di Maradona, Zidane 3°, Baggio 9°: i migliori 10 secondo la Fifa" [Pelè better than Maradona, Zidane 3rd, Baggio 9th: the best 10s according to FIFA]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 2 March 2014. Archived from the original on 9 August 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2014.
 George Arnett; Ami Sedghi (29 May 2014). "The World Cup's top 100 footballers: by nationality, goals scored and votes". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2016.
 Katwala, Amit (29 May 2018). "Ranked! The 25 best World Cup players EVER". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018.
 Gallagher, Jack (27 March 2020). "Diego Maradona: The Extremes of Footballing Morality & the Greatest of All Time". www.90min.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2020.
 Solhekol, Kaveh; Sheth, Dharmesh (30 May 2020). "Ronaldo, Eric Cantona, Zlatan Ibrahimovic: The best players never to win Champions League 25–1". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 1 June 2020.
 "Maradona sentenced for shooting reporters". BBC. 13 June 1998. Archived from the original on 28 September 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Reporters Accuse Maradona of Firing an Air Gun at Them". LA Times. 3 February 1994. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Interview with Jorge Valdano" (in Spanish). El Mundo. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 21 June 2005.
 "70 facts about Argentina legend Diego Maradona". Goal. 28 May 2020. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "ICON: When Diego Maradona fought an exhibition boxing match for charity back in 1996 and jokingly attacked the referee". talksport.com. 25 November 2020. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020.
 Maradona 'tells all' in autobiography. Associated Press. 20 December 2000.
 Garcia, Anne-Marie (21 February 2002). "Maradona donates royalties from Cuban edition of his book". Granma. Archived from the original on 13 October 2006.
 "Maradona or Pele?". CNN/SI. 10 December 2000. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014.
 "Argentina can't retire Maradona's shirt". ESPN Inc. 26 May 2002. Archived from the original on 25 March 2003.
 Hamilton, Fiona (22 March 2010). "The ten greatest World Cup playersbr No 1 Diego Maradona Argentina". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
 White, Duncan (29 October 2011). "Jay Bothroyd puts good times with playboy Saadi Gaddafi, son of dead Libya tyrant Colonel Gaddafi, behind him". National Post. Retrieved 31 March 2012
 Bhaumik, Subir (8 December 2008). "Maradona sends Calcutta into frenzy". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "El Diez emprende dos nuevos desafíos" (in Spanish). ESPN Deportes. 28 July 2005. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Maradona joins Boca Juniors". ABC News. 23 June 2005. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 Moore, Glenn (2 September 2006). "Basile's team ready for Brazil in first of many friendlies". The Independent. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 "Boca pull off world record victory". CNN. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 23 April 2023.
 Goni, Uki (17 August 2005). "Maradona reinvents himself as chatshow host". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 "Roberto Durán estuvo con Diego Maradona" (in Spanish). La Prensa. 21 September 2005. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014.
 "Tyson Must Return to Brazil for Trial". Washington Post. 11 November 2005. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Maradona Rejects Role With Argentina Team". The New York Times. Reuters. 10 November 2005. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Maradona scores but England win UNICEF match". 28 May 2006. Archived from the original on 18 March 2007.
 "Remembering Diego Maradona's time at Boca Juniors". Overlyzer. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 28 March 2022.
 Aftab, Kaleem (21 May 2008). "Maradona by Kusturica". The Independent. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Interreligious Match for Peace: 1/9/2014". Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2014.
 "Il Papa a Maradona: "Ti aspettavo". Diego show con Baggio, poi si infuria: "Icardi non-doveva giocare"". La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2014.
 "29 Years on from the Infamous Argentina-England Match, Maradona holds up his hands in apology", MARCA, 17 August 2015, archived from the original on 1 December 2020, retrieved 10 October 2022
 Rebossio, Alejandro (18 August 2015), "Maradona visits Tunisian referee who awarded him 1986 "Hand of God" goal", El País, archived from the original on 21 October 2019, retrieved 10 October 2022
 Adams, Rebecca (29 October 2008). "Diego Maradona factfile". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 February 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Maradona hired to coach UAE club Al Wasl". CBC Sports. 16 May 2011. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona to coach Dubai club". ESPN. 16 May 2011. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona sacked as manager of Al Wasl". BBC. 10 July 2012. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Maradona wants to hold talks to save Al Wasl job". The Times of India. 12 July 2012. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012.
 "Diego Maradona sacked by new board at Al-Wasl after disappointing season". The Guardian. 10 July 2012. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona: I have many chances to become Fifa's new vice-president". The Guardian. 8 June 2015. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona leaves job in UAE after failing to secure automatic promotion". Sky Sports. 6 May 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 "Diego Maradona leaves Al Fujairah after failing to secure automatic promotion". BBC. 27 April 2018. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Yes, Diego is with us!". Dynamo Brest. 16 May 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2018... Retrieved 23 July 2018
 "Diego Maradona presented as Dinamo Brest chairman". BBC Sport. 16 July 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona's 'rebirth' at coaching job at Mexican side Dorados". BBC. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 10 September 2018.
 Staff. "Angulo hat-trick helps get Maradona off to winning start in Mexico". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 19 September 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2018.
 Marshall, Tom (14 June 2019). "Maradona out as Dorados manager, cites health". ESPN. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2019.
 "¡Diego, bienvenido al Lobo!". Gimnasia de La Plata (in Spanish). 5 September 2019. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 6 September 2019.
 "Diego Maradona leaves Gimnasia de La Plata after just two months". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 20 November 2019.
 "Diego Maradona announces Gimnasia return – two days after quitting". BBC. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2019.
 Scandolo, Ramiro (21 November 2019). "Maradona to stay on at Gimnasia". Reuters. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2019.
 "Maradona returns as Gimnasia head coach, two days after stepping down". Yahoo Sports. 22 November 2019. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2019.
 "Maradona pledges future to Gimnasia after club elections – Xinhua | English.news.cn". www.xinhuanet.com. Archived from the original on 16 December 2019.
 "Maradona keeps Gimnasia gig despite struggles". ESPN.com. 3 June 2020. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 11 June 2020.
 Garcia, Adriana (27 November 2020). "Maradona's coaching staff at Gimnasia y La Plata resign following his death". ESPN. Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2022.
 "Bianchi Favourite For Job". Eurosport. 22 October 2008. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Homewood, Brian (22 October 2008). "Soccer-Bianchi favourite for Argentina, Maradona in the hunt". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Maradona named as Argentina coach". BBC. 4 November 2008. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Campbell, Andy (19 November 2008). "Scotland 0–1 Argentina". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2010.
 "Maradona's Argentina hit for six". BBC. 1 April 2009. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Roughley, Gregg (1 April 2009). "'Every goal was like a stab in my heart,' says Diego Maradona". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Last-gasp Palermo wins it in the rain". ESPN. 10 October 2009. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
 "Late winner puts Argentina in World Cup finals". CNN. 14 October 2009. Archived from the original on 15 October 2009. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
 World Cup 2010 (15 October 2009). "Diego Maradona Tells Press To 'Suck It' After Argentina Triumph Over Uruguay". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 4 November 2015. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
 "Maradona hit with two-month ban". BBC Sport. London. 15 November 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2010. Retrieved 15 November 2009.
 "La selección argentina perdió 4 a 2 ante Catalunya en partido vibrante" [The Argentine team lost 4 to 2 against Catalonia in a vibrant match]. La Capital (in Spanish). 22 December 2009. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Dawkes, Phil (12 June 2010). "Argentina 1–0 Nigeria". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 22 August 2019. Retrieved 17 June 2010.
 Stevenson, Jonathan (17 June 2010). "Argentina 4–1 South Korea". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2010.
 "Maradona's men in top spot". ESPNsoccernet. ESPN. 22 June 2010. Archived from the original on 4 December 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2010.
 Longman, Jeré (3 June 2010). "Germany Shows Its Strength". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 4 June 2010.
 "England slip to worst Cup ranking". BBC. 13 July 2010. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Sad Maradona considers quitting". BBC Sport. 4 July 2010. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2010.
 "Argentina to offer Diego Maradona new four-year deal". BBC Sport. 15 July 2010. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2010.
 "Diego Maradona departs as manager of Argentina". The Guardian. London. Press Association. 27 July 2010. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 27 July 2010.
 "'Betrayed' Maradona lashes out at AFA". ESPNsoccernet. ESPN. 29 July 2010. Archived from the original on 3 August 2010. Retrieved 29 July 2010.
 Batson, Chris (25 November 2020). "Diego Maradona — his life in pictures". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 La Liga (19 February 2009). "Diego Maradona Becomes A Grandfather As Sergio Aguero Junior Is Born". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 21 February 2009. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
 ESPN Deportes – "Llega en son de paz" . ESPN. Retrieved 19 May 2006
 "El amor al ídolo". ESPN Deportes (in Spanish). 9 June 2005. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona Junior". Resport.it. Archived from the original on 6 October 2010. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
 "Había una vez... un elenco para la selección". Clarín (in Spanish). 3 June 2005. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 Demare, Silvina. "Dalma Maradona: diario de una princesa". Clarín (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 30 April 2010.
 "Prima Dona". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 20 August 2018. Retrieved 19 August 2018.
 "Diego Maradona's father Don Diego dies aged 87". The Guardian. 25 June 2015. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
 "Diego Maradona secretly filmed 'beating' his girlfriend after row over mobile phone". ITV News. 27 November 2020. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 Smith, Joan (27 November 2020). "Tributes to Diego Maradona show how easily violence against women is ignored". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Марадона - о расставании с Росио Оливой: "Я не тот, кто бьет жену, но я хотел оторвать ей голову" - Новости : Football.By : Новости футбола Беларуси и мира". football.by (in Russian). 18 January 2019. Archived from the original on 20 May 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2021.
 "La historia del sobrino de Maradona que juega en River: su polémica llegada al club y su particular parecido con el tío". La Nación (in Spanish). 3 May 2018. Archived from the original on 7 April 2019. Retrieved 7 April 2019.
 "Diego Maradona treated by paramedics after appearing to collapse at Argentina vs Nigeria World Cup 2018 game". The Independent. 27 June 2018. Archived from the original on 6 December 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 May, John (19 April 2004). "Maradona's fall from grace". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 4 April 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2022.
 "The New York Times: SOCCER; Maradona Sentenced". AP via New York Times. 19 September 1991. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 15 February 2017.
 Firpo, Hernán (2 April 2020). "El éxito que llegó de España La extraña historia de Mi enfermedad, o cuando Fabiana Cantilo resucitó a Andrés Calamaro". Clarín (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 4 October 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020.
 Haylett, Trevor; Shaw, Phil (25 August 1994). "Football: Maradona banned for 15 months: Fifa takes tough stance". The Independent. Archived from the original on 17 July 2017. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Maradona has surgery on stomach". BBC. 6 March 2005. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020. Retrieved 28 June 2010.
 Associated Press. "Maradona's gastric bypass inspires obese Colombians". ESPN. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2010.
 "Maradona treated for alcoholism". BBC. 22 April 2007. Archived from the original on 11 September 2007. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Calegari, Rodrigo (26 April 2007). "Malas lenguas". Olé. Archived from the original on 18 September 2009. (in Spanish)
 "Maradona leaves alcoholism clinic". BBC News. 7 May 2007. Archived from the original on 5 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
 "Maradona says he no longer drinks". ESPN. 8 May 2007. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012.
 Couzens, Gerard; Moore-Bridger, Benedict (27 June 2018). "Diego Maradona blames bizarre World Cup behaviour on white wine binge in VIP box". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Diego Maradona recovering in hospital after operation for internal bleeding". BBC Sport. 13 January 2019. Archived from the original on 10 November 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2019.
 Haroun, Azmi (26 November 2020). "Beyond soccer, here are some of the political causes, leaders, and movements Diego Maradona supported in his life". Insider. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "'In my heart I am Palestinian': Maradona's activism remembered". Al-Jazeera. 26 November 2020. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 Taylor, Chris (6 November 2005). "A big hand". The Observer. UK. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 19 June 2006.
 Maradona, Diego; Daniel Arcucci; Ernesto Cherquis Bialo (2005). El Diego. London: Yellow Jersey. ISBN 0-224-07190-4.
 Agnew, Paddy (2012). Forza Italia The Fall and Rise of Italian Football. Ebury Publishing. p. 85.
 Marsh, Sarah (25 November 2020). "Maradona, football legend, was a champion of Latin America's left". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Carroll, Rory (20 August 2007). "Maradona and Chávez laugh over 'hand of god' goal on chat show". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2007.
 Kevan, Paul (27 June 2007). "Maradona fancies a Copa". Metro. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Sherlock, Harry (2 July 2017). "'Donald Trump is a cartoon' - Diego Maradona ridicules US president and hails 'peaceful' Putin". Goal.com. Retrieved 2 July 2022.
 Amis, Martin (1 October 2004). "In search of Dieguito". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 August 2021.
 Timerman, Jordana (5 November 2005). "Chávez and Maradona Lead Massive Rebuke of Bush". The Nation. Archived from the original on 16 June 2006. Retrieved 20 June 2006.
 "Image of Maradona wearing the STOP BU卐H shirt". Archived from the original on 23 June 2010. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
 "Ex-soccer star Maradona tells Chavez he hates U.S." Reuters. 19 August 2007. Archived from the original on 29 April 2008. Retrieved 20 August 2007.
 Crowley, James (25 November 2020). "After Maradona's Death, His Opinion of America Resurfaces: 'I Hate Everything From the U.S.'". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020.
 "Football awaits an audience with Italy and Argentina". Eurosport. 13 August 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014.
 Pullella, Philip (2 September 2014). "Diego Maradona meets Pope Francis in Rome". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Naughton, Philippe (3 April 2008). "Diego Maradona makes a fan of President Ahmadinejad of Iran". The Sunday Times. London. Retrieved 28 June 2010.[dead link]
 "Diego Maradona visits Hugo Chavez tomb". NDTV. 13 April 2013. Archived from the original on 25 August 2016.
 "Así bailó Maradona durante el cierre de campaña de Maduro". El Nacional (in Spanish). 17 May 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2018.
 "Maradona acompañó a Maduro en su cierre de campaña electoral". Panorama.com.ve (in Spanish). 17 May 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2018.
 "Federación México multa a Maradona por dedicar triunfo a Maduro". Reuters (in Spanish). 8 April 2019. Archived from the original on 9 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019.
 "Why Diego Maradona will always be Argentina's favourite son". CBC News. 25 November 2020.
 Bhardwaj, Vaishali (21 October 2015). "Diego Maradona sends a 'big hug to the Houses of Parliament' and thanks the Queen". London Evening Standard . Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 "Police seize Maradona's earrings". BBC News. 19 September 2009. Retrieved 15 June 2021.
 "Maradona still owes 37 million euros, taxman says". wsn.com. 28 March 2009. Archived from the original on 31 January 2015.
 "Italy court clears Maradona of tax evasion years after his death". Reuters. 5 January 2024. Retrieved 6 January 2024.
 Rey, Deborah; McStay, Kirsten (3 November 2020). "Football legend Diego Maradona admitted to hospital with signs of depression". Daily Record. Retrieved 3 November 2020.
 "Argentina great Maradona to have emergency brain surgery". ESPN. 3 November 2020. Retrieved 3 November 2020.
 Tatiana Arias and Hugo Correa (12 November 2020). "Diego Maradona discharged from clinic following successful brain surgery". CNN. Retrieved 12 November 2020.
 de Menezes, Jack (25 November 2020). "Diego Maradona dies aged 60". The Independent. Retrieved 25 November 2020.
 "Conmoción en el country donde murió Maradona: "Lo recibimos como a un vecino más"" (in Spanish). Clarín. 25 November 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020. Allí, el 10 transitó sus últimos días en la casa ubicada dentro del complejo emplazado en la avenida Italia al 4665, en Dique Luján, muy cerca del límite con Escobar.
 "Diego Maradona: Footballer laid to rest as Argentina grieves". BBC News. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 AFP (26 November 2020). "Chaos as heartbroken Maradona mourners clash with police at wake". Fox Sports Australia. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 AFP (26 November 2020). "Diego Maradona funeral cortege heads to cemetery near Buenos Aires". News24. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Diego Maradona laid to rest in private ceremony in Buenos Aires". Sky Sports. 27 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Stars line up to laud Diego". FIFA.com. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Diego Maradona: Argentina legend dies aged 60". BBC News. 25 November 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020.
 Church, Ben (25 November 2020). "Diego Maradona dies aged 60". CNN. Retrieved 25 November 2020.
 "Champions League clubs pay tribute to Maradona with moment of silence". TSN. 25 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 "Copa Libertadores: Conmebol le aplica el luto por Maradona a Boca Juniors". Strikers.futbol. 25 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Boca Juniors' Copa Libertadores game postponed after Maradona's death". SportsNet. 25 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "AFC President pays tribute to footballing legend Maradona". AFC.com. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Serie A plans league-wide weekend tribute to Diego Maradona". TSN.ca. 27 November 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 "Napoli v HNK Rijeka: Hosts pay tribute to Maradona at Stadio San Paolo". BBC Sport. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
 "'The greatest idol': football world pays tribute to Diego Maradona – video". The Guardian. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "Diego Maradona Was From Another Planet, Says Eto'o". panafricanfootball. 27 November 2020. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2020.
 Chauhan, Prathamesh Singh (26 November 2020). "Khabib Nurmagomedov, Conor McGregor and Mike Tyson React to Diego Maradona's Demise". EssentiallySports. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 "Maradona passes away: Celebrities pay tributes to the legend". mid-day. 25 November 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 "Tennis World Pays Tribute to Maradona". THISDAYLIVE. 28 November 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 West, Jenna (25 November 2020). "Sports World Pays Tribute to Diego Maradona". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 "The tribute of the basketball workforce to Diego Maradona". TV6 News. Archived from the original on 13 December 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 "Stadium near Barasat named after legendary Diego Maradona". The Times of India. 27 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020.
 "All-New Copa Diego Maradona Logo Launched". Footy Headlines. 28 November 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 Flood, George (28 November 2020). "All Blacks pay touching tribute to Diego Maradona ahead of Tri Nations clash against Argentina". Evening Standard. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 "Argentina moved by All Blacks' Tri-Nations tribute to Diego Maradona". The Guardian. 29 November 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2022.
 Marsden, Sam (29 November 2020). "Messi honours Maradona with Newell's Old Boys shirt as Barca rout Osasuna". ESPN. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
 Chakravarti, Neelav. "Watch: Boca Juniors' Emotional Tribute Brings Diego Maradona's Daughter To Tears". NDTV. Retrieved 1 December 2020.
 "Seven medical professionals charged with homicide after investigation into Diego Maradona's death". CNN. 21 May 2021.
 Candalaft, Martín (25 June 2021). "Indagan a Cosachov, la psiquiatra acusada del homicidio de Maradona: aceptó responder las preguntas de los fiscales" [Cosachov qustioned: the psychiatrist accused of Maradona's murder: she agreed to answer the questions of the prosecutors]. Infobae (in Spanish). Retrieved 25 June 2021.
 "Muerte de Maradona: declara la psiquiatra Agustina Cosachov" [Death of Maradona: the psychiatrist Agustina Cosachov declares]. Ámbito Financiero (in Spanish). 25 June 2021. Retrieved 25 June 2021.
 "Maradona's psychiatrist rejects blame in football legend's death". Al Jazeera. 26 June 2021. Retrieved 26 June 2021.
 "Muerte de Maradona: querella pidió la detención de Leopoldo Luque, Agustina Cosachov, el psicólogo y la médica de la prepaga" [Death of Maradona: complaint requested the arrest of Leopoldo Luque, Agustina Cosachov, the psychologist and the prepaid doctor]. Minuto Uno (in Spanish). 28 June 2021. Retrieved 28 June 2021.
 "Muerte de Maradona: rechazan las detenciones de Luque y Cosachov con una dura crítica al abogado que las pidió" [Death of Maradona: prosecutors reject the arrests of Luque and Cosachov with a harsh criticism of the lawyer who requested them]. Clarín (in Spanish). 1 July 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2021.
 Di Nicola, Gabriel (1 July 2021). "La muerte de Diego Maradona: con duras críticas a un abogado querellante rechazaron los pedidos de detención de los imputados" [The death of Diego Maradona: with harsh criticism of a plaintiff lawyer they rejected the requests for the arrest of the accused]. La Nación (in Spanish). Retrieved 1 July 2021.
 "Maradona: Medical staff to be tried for football legend's death". BBC. 23 June 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2022.
 "An Argentine judge orders 8 to face a homicide trial in soccer star Maradona's death". NPR. 23 June 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2022.
 Baynes, Megan (23 June 2022). "Diego Maradona: Eight doctors and nurses who cared for Argentina legend face homicide charges after his death". Sky Sports. Retrieved 14 October 2022.
 Agence France Presse (AFP) (18 April 2023). "Eight accused of wrongdoing in Maradona's death will stand trial, rules court | Buenos Aires Times". Buenos Aires Times. Retrieved 1 May 2023.
 "El juicio por la muerte de Diego Maradona se hará en marzo de 2025" [The trial for Diego Maradona's death will be held in March 2025]. Infobae (in Spanish). 12 September 2024. Retrieved 24 December 2024.
 "Church of Maradona faithful touched by the Hand of God". The Independent. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
 "¿Es el sucesor natural?". ESPN Deportes (in Spanish). 29 June 2006. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Shields, Tom (9 April 2006). "Lets Raise a Glass to Maradona, Tom Shields Sports Diary". Sunday Herald. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Toucon, Alvaro Sanjurjo (2006). "Havana 2006 "The Road to San Diego" A Chronicle of Men and Heroes". FIPRESCI. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007.
 "Maradona Soccer Game". Archived from the original on 6 July 2013.
 "Maradona in intensive care". BBC Sport. 28 April 2004. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Blake, Mark (2010). Is This The Real Life? The Untold Story of Queen. Arum Press. p. 255.
 Jimmy Burns (2011) "Maradona: The Hand of God". pp. 71, 84. A&C Black
 "Maradona, Pelé and Zidane for Vuitton". GQ Magazine. Retrieved 14 May 2014
 "Shakira launches clip 'Waka Waka' Cup official music" (in Portuguese). Reforma. 8 June 2010. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 9 June 2010.
 "ARCHIVO 10, Diego Maradona – Videos de publicidades". Archivo10.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 6 May 2011.
 "Maradona diz não se arrepender de usar camisa do Brasil na TV". AdNews.com.br. 30 April 2006. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011.
 "World Cup 2014: Brazilians named after Maradona and Lineker". BBC Sport. 23 June 2014. Retrieved 1 February 2015.
 Burt, Jason (31 January 2015). "Diego Costa: I take things to limit but I did nothing wrong". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2015.
 "FIFA 18 to include 95-rated icon Diego Maradona as EA Sports adds footballing legend to Ultimate Team". Evening Standard. Retrieved 8 September 2017
 "Film-maker Asif Kapadia: 'Maradona is the third part of a trilogy about child geniuses and fame'". The Guardian. 1 October 2017.
 Stolworthy, Jacob (1 October 2017). "Amy director Asif Kapadia set to make Maradona documentary". The Independent. Retrieved 10 October 2022.
 Ciullini, Pablo. "Diego Armando Maradona – Goals in Argentina League". RSSSF. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Estadísticas con la Selección Argentina". diegomaradona.com. Archived from the original on 18 October 2009. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
 De Calò, Alessandro (2011). Il calcio di Maradona ai raggi X (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. p. 6.
 Bobrowsky, Josef (9 July 2009). "Artemio Franchi Trophy 1993". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2018.
 "The Albiceleste underdog who conquered the world". FIFA. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 27 February 2015.
 "Todos los ganadores del oro, desde 1954" [All gold winners since 1954]. La Nación (in Spanish). Buenos Aires. 18 December 2007. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2012. 1986 Diego Maradona (Fútbol)
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979-1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979-1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979-1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 13 February 2023.
 Pierrend, José Luis; Gorgazzi, Osvaldo José. "Argentina – Player of the Year". RSSSF. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 Pierrend, José Luis. "South American Player of the Year 1986". RSSSF. Retrieved 4 December 2021.
 Pierrend, José Luis. "South American Player of the Year 1989". RSSSF. Retrieved 4 December 2021.
 Pierrend, José Luis. "South American Player of the Year 1990". RSSSF. Retrieved 4 December 2021.
 Bobrowsky, Josef; Pierrend, José Luis. "South American Player of the Year 1992". RSSSF. Retrieved 4 December 2021.
 "El Grafico 1981 ranking". elgrafico.
 "El Gráfico Américas player of the year (1980-1983)". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979-1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979-1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 McCracken, Craig (10 March 2014). "Eric Batty's World XI's – The Eighties and Nineties". Beyond The Last Man. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 "Guerin Sportivo Serie A Team of the Year". BigSoccer. Retrieved 30 September 2024.
 Pierrend, José Luis; Di Maggio, Roberto. "Guerin d'Oro". RSSSF. Retrieved 10 September 2015.
 Pierrend, José Luis. ""Onze Mondial" Awards". RSSSF. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 "1986 FIFA World Cup Mexico: Awards". FIFA. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013.
 "World Cup 1986 – Statistics". Planet World Cup. Retrieved 28 February 2015.
 "L'Équipe World Champion of Champions". whoholdsthetitle.com. 10 January 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979–1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 13 February 2023.
 "Diego Maradona, who led Argentina to victory in the..." UPI. Retrieved 15 April 2025.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979–1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 13 February 2023.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979-1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 13 February 2023.
 "Guerin Sportivo World Player of the Year awards 1979-1986". BigSoccer Forum. Retrieved 13 February 2023.
 Rota, Davide; Di Maggio, Roberto. "Italy - Coppa Italia Top Scorers". RSSSF. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "South American Team of the Year". RSSSF. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
 de Arruda, Marcelo Leme. "World All-Time Teams". RSSSF. Retrieved 30 June 2017.
 "Combien de Ballon(s) d'Or France Football aurait pu remporter Diego Maradona ?". France Football (in French). 29 October 2020. Archived from the original on 14 November 2020. Retrieved 14 November 2020.
 "Maradona is sportsman of the century". IOL. 21 December 1999. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Marca Leyenda: Diego Maradona". MARCA. 3 April 2018. Archived from the original on 17 July 2018.
 "Nápoli retira camiseta número 10 en homenaje a Maradona" [Napoli retires number 10 jersey in tribute to Maradona]. Caracol Radio (in Spanish). 24 August 2000. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "FIFA Dream Team: Maradona voted top player". The Indian Express. 19 June 2002. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012.
 "Golden Foot – Diego Armando Maradona". Goldenfoot.com. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015. Retrieved 1 March 2015.
 "Maradona honoured in Argentina". Irish Examiner. 22 June 2005. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "Un diario inglés eligió a Maradona como el mejor jugador de la historia de los mundiales". El Comercio (in Spanish). 22 March 2010. Archived from the original on 30 December 2017. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "CdS, Maradona meglio di tutti, batte anche Valentino Rossi". tifonapoli.it (in Italian). 3 February 2012. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018.
 "Diego Armando Maradona Best Player of the 20th Century". globesoccer.co. Globe Soccer. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2021.
 "Messi y Cristiano: los favoritos para ser el Jugador del Siglo". ole.com.ar (in Spanish). Olé. 24 November 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2021.
 "Wall of Fame". Globe Soccer.com. Retrieved 28 December 2015.
 Jamie Rainbow (2 July 2013). "The Greatest XI: how the panel voted". World Soccer. Archived from the original on 1 January 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
 "Italian football Hall of Fame to induct ten new stars". 25 October 2016. Archived from the original on 26 October 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016.
 "La Selección de Todos los Tiempos" [The Team of All Time] (in Spanish). Argentine Football Association. 4 January 2016. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved 29 January 2018.
 "Top 50 des joueurs sud-américains de l'histoire" [Top 50 South-American footballers in history]. L'Équipe (in French). 4 July 2015. Archived from the original on 4 July 2015. Retrieved 6 July 2015.
 "IFFHS announce the 48 football legend players". IFFHS. 25 January 2016. Archived from the original on 24 September 2019. Retrieved 14 September 2016.
 Crépin, Timothé (14 December 2020). "Ballon d'Or Dream Team : Découvrez les révélations de ce onze de légende !". France Football (in French). Retrieved 14 December 2020.
 "IFFHS All Time World Men's Dream Team". IFFHS. 22 May 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
 "IFFHS All Time South America Men's Dream Team". IFFHS. 22 May 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
External links
Diego Maradona
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Data from Wikidata
Diego Maradona: Argentina football legend dies aged 60 Archived 10 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Diego Maradona was addicted alcohol and marijuana cause of death Archived 10 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Diego Maradona – FIFA competition record (archived) Edit this at Wikidata
Diego Maradona – UEFA competition record (archive) Edit this at Wikidata
World Cup-winners status
Preceded by
Carlos Alberto Torres
1944	Latest Born Captain to Die
25 November 2020 – present	Incumbent
vte
Diego Maradona
Argentina squads
Awards
Diego Maradona managerial positions
Portals:
icon Association football
flag Argentina
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Diego Maradona1960 births2020 deaths1979 Copa América players1982 FIFA World Cup players1986 FIFA World Cup players1987 Copa América players1989 Copa América players1990 FIFA World Cup players1994 FIFA World Cup players2010 FIFA World Cup managersFIFA World Cup–winning playersAl Wasl F.C. managersAnti-AmericanismArgentina men's international footballersArgentina national football team managersArgentina men's under-20 international footballersArgentina men's youth international footballersArgentine expatriate men's footballersArgentine expatriate football managersArgentine expatriates in CubaArgentine expatriate sportspeople in ItalyArgentine expatriate sportspeople in MexicoArgentine expatriate sportspeople in SpainArgentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Arab EmiratesArgentine men's footballersArgentine football managersArgentine nationalistsArgentine people of Basque descentArgentine people of Croatian descentArgentine people of Guaraní descentArgentine sportspeople of Italian descentArgentine Primera División managersArgentine Primera División playersArgentine Roman CatholicsArgentine socialistsArgentine sportspeople in doping casesArgentine television talk show hostsArgentinos Juniors footballersMen's association football forwardsMen's association football midfieldersBoca Juniors footballersClub de Gimnasia y Esgrima La Plata managersDeified menDoping cases in association footballDorados de Sinaloa managersExpatriate men's footballers in ItalyExpatriate men's footballers in SpainExpatriate football managers in MexicoExpatriate football managers in the United Arab EmiratesFC Barcelona playersFIFA 100Fujairah FC managersIlleistsLa Liga playersMaradona familyNewell's Old Boys footballersParody religion deitiesPeople convicted of drug offensesPeople from Lomas de Zamora PartidoRacing Club de Avellaneda managersSSC Napoli playersSerie A playersSevilla FC playersSouth American Footballer of the Year winnersFootballers from LanúsTextil Mandiyú managersUAE Pro League managersUEFA Europa League–winning playersWorld Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winnersAssociation football players with retired numbers20th-century Argentine sportsmen
This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 18:30 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Diego Maradona

141 languages
Add topic



WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Early life

Rise of Fatah

Confrontation with Jordan
Headquarters in Lebanon

Headquarters in Tunisia

Palestinian Authority and peace negotiations

Political survival

Financial dealings
Illness and death

Legacy
See also
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Yasser Arafat

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Featured article
Extended-protected article
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Yasir Arafat" redirects here. For other uses, see Yasir Arafat (disambiguation).
Yasser Arafat
ياسر عرفات

Arafat in 1996
1st President of the Palestinian National Authority
In office
5 July 1994 – 11 November 2004
Prime Minister	
Mahmoud Abbas
Ahmed Qurei
Succeeded by	Rawhi Fattouh (interim)
Mahmoud Abbas
1st President of the State of Palestine
In office
2 April 1989 – 11 November 2004
Prime Minister	Mahmoud Abbas
Ahmed Qurei
Succeeded by	Rawhi Fattouh (interim)
Mahmoud Abbas
3rd Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization
In office
4 February 1969 – 29 October 2004
Preceded by	Yahya Hammuda
Succeeded by	Mahmoud Abbas
Personal details
Born	Mohammed Abdel Rahman Abdel Raouf Arafat al-Qudwa al-Husseini
4 or 24 August 1929
Cairo, Egypt
Died	11 November 2004 (aged 75)
Clamart, Hauts-de-Seine, France
Resting place	Arafat's compound
Political party	Fatah
Spouse	Suha Arafat ​(m. 1990)​
Children	1
Alma mater	University of King Fuad I
Profession	Civil engineer
Signature	
Nickname	Abu Ammar[1]
	
This article is part of
a series about
Yasser Arafat
Personal
Palestine Liberation Organization
Pre-presidency
Lebanese Civil War
1st President of Palestine
Elections

vte
Yasser Arafat[a] (4 or 24 August 1929 – 11 November 2004), also popularly known by his kunya Abu Ammar,[b] was a Palestinian political leader. He was chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) from 1969 to 2004, President of the State of Palestine from 1989 to 2004 and President of the Palestinian Authority (PNA) from 1994 to 2004.[3] Ideologically an Arab nationalist and a socialist, Arafat was a founding member of the Fatah political party, which he led from 1959 until 2004.

Arafat was born to Palestinian parents in Cairo, Egypt, where he spent most of his youth. He studied at the University of King Fuad I. While a student, he embraced Arab nationalist and anti-Zionist ideas. Opposed to the 1948 creation of the State of Israel, he fought alongside the Muslim Brotherhood during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. Following the defeat of Arab forces, Arafat returned to Cairo and served as president of the General Union of Palestinian Students from 1952 to 1956.

In the latter part of the 1950s, Arafat co-founded Fatah, a paramilitary organization which sought Israel's replacement with a Palestinian state. Fatah operated within several Arab countries, from where it launched attacks on Israeli targets. In the latter part of the 1960s Arafat's profile grew; in 1967 he joined the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) and in 1969 was elected chair of the Palestinian National Council (PNC). Fatah's growing presence in Jordan resulted in military clashes with King Hussein's Jordanian government and in the early 1970s it relocated to Lebanon. There, Fatah assisted the Lebanese National Movement during the Lebanese Civil War and continued its attacks on Israel, resulting in the organization becoming a major target of Israeli invasions during the 1978 South Lebanon conflict and 1982 Lebanon War.

From 1983 to 1993, Arafat based himself in Tunisia, and began to shift his approach from open conflict with the Israelis to negotiation. In 1988, he acknowledged Israel's right to exist and sought a two-state solution to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. In 1994, he returned to Palestine, settling in Gaza City and promoting self-governance for the Palestinian territories. He engaged in a series of negotiations with the Israeli government to end the conflict between it and the PLO. These included the Madrid Conference of 1991, the 1993 Oslo Accords and the 2000 Camp David Summit. The success of the negotiations in Oslo led to Arafat being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, alongside Israeli Prime Ministers Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres, in 1994. At the time, Fatah's support among the Palestinians declined with the growth of Hamas and other militant rivals. In late 2004, after effectively being confined within his Ramallah compound for over two years by the Israeli army, Arafat fell into a coma and died. The cause of Arafat's death remains the subject of speculation. Investigations by Russian and French teams determined no foul play was involved,[4][5][6] while a Swiss team determined he was radiologically poisoned.[7][8]

Arafat remains a controversial figure. Palestinians generally view him as a martyr who symbolized the national aspirations of his people, while many Israelis regarded him as a terrorist.[9][10][11][12] Palestinian rivals, including Islamists and several PLO radicals, frequently denounced him as corrupt or too submissive in his concessions to the Israeli government.


Early life

Arafat (right) with his sister Khadija and brother Fathi in Cairo, 1942
Birth and childhood
Arafat was born in Cairo, Egypt,[13] on 4[14][15] or 24 August 1929.[16][17]: 269  His father, Abdel Raouf al-Qudwa al-Husseini, was a Palestinian from Gaza City, whose mother, Yasser's paternal grandmother, was Egyptian. Arafat's father battled in the Egyptian courts for 25 years to claim family land in Egypt as part of his inheritance but was unsuccessful.[18] He worked as a textile merchant in Cairo's religiously mixed Sakakini District. Arafat was the second-youngest of seven children and was, along with his younger brother Fathi, the only offspring born in Cairo. Jerusalem was the family home of his mother, Zahwa Abul Saud, who died from a kidney ailment in 1933, when Arafat was four years of age.[19]

Arafat's first visit to Jerusalem came when his father, unable to raise seven children alone, sent Yasser and his brother Fathi to their mother's family in the Mughrabi Quarter of the Old City. They lived there with their uncle Salim Abul Saud for four years. In 1937, their father recalled them to be taken care of by their older sister, Inam. Arafat had a deteriorating relationship with his father; when he died in 1952, Arafat did not attend the funeral, nor did he visit his father's grave upon his return to Gaza. Arafat's sister Inam stated in an interview with Arafat's biographer, British historian Alan Hart, that Arafat was heavily beaten by his father for going to the Jewish quarter in Cairo and attending religious services. When she asked Arafat why he would not stop going, he responded by saying that he wanted to study Jewish mentality.[19]

Education
In 1944, Arafat enrolled in the University of King Fuad I and graduated in 1950.[19] At university, he engaged Jews in discussion and read publications by Theodor Herzl and other prominent Zionists.[20] By 1946, he was an Arab nationalist and began procuring weapons to be smuggled into Mandatory Palestine, for use by irregulars in the Arab Higher Committee and the Army of the Holy War militias.[21]

During the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, Arafat left the university and, along with other Arabs, sought to enter Palestine to join Arab forces fighting against Israeli troops and the creation of the state of Israel. However, instead of joining the ranks of the Palestinian fedayeen, Arafat fought alongside the Muslim Brotherhood, although he did not join the organization. He took part in combat in the Gaza area (which was the main battleground of Egyptian forces during the conflict). In early 1949, the war was winding down in Israel's favor, and Arafat returned to Cairo due to a lack of logistical support.[19]

After returning to the university, Arafat studied civil engineering and served as president of the General Union of Palestinian Students (GUPS) from 1952 to 1956. During his first year as president of the union, the university was renamed Cairo University after a coup was carried out by the Free Officers Movement overthrowing King Farouk I. By that time, Arafat had graduated with a bachelor's degree in civil engineering and was called to duty to fight with Egyptian forces during the Suez Crisis; however, he never actually fought.[19] Later that year, at a conference in Prague, he donned a solid white keffiyeh–different from the fishnet-patterned one he adopted later in Kuwait, which was to become his emblem.[22]

Personal life
In 1990, Arafat married Suha Tawil, a Palestinian Christian, when he was 61 and Suha, 27. Her mother introduced her to him in France, after which she worked as his secretary in Tunis.[23][24] Prior to their marriage, Arafat adopted fifty Palestinian war orphans.[25] During their marriage, Suha tried to leave Arafat on many occasions, but he forbade it.[26] Suha said she regrets the marriage, and given the choice again would not repeat it.[26][27] In mid-1995, Arafat's wife Suha gave birth in a Paris hospital to a daughter, named Zahwa after Arafat's mother.[28]

Name
Arafat's full name was Mohammed Abdel Rahman Abdel Raouf Arafat al-Qudwa al-Husseini. Mohammed Abdel Rahman was his first name, Abdel Raouf was his father's name and Arafat his grandfather's. Al-Qudwa was the name of his tribe and al-Husseini was that of the clan to which the al-Qudwas belonged. The al-Husseini clan was based in Gaza and is not related to the well-known al-Husayni clan of Jerusalem.[19]

Since Arafat was raised in Cairo, the tradition of dropping the Mohammed or Ahmad portion of one's first name was common; notable Egyptians such as Anwar Sadat and Hosni Mubarak did so. However, Arafat dropped Abdel Rahman and Abdel Raouf from his name as well. During the early 1950s, Arafat adopted the name Yasser, and in the early years of Arafat's guerrilla career, he assumed the nom de guerre of Abu Ammar. Both names are related to Ammar ibn Yasir, one of Muhammad's early companions. Although he dropped most of his inherited names, he retained Arafat due to its significance in Islam.[19]

Rise of Fatah
Founding of Fatah
Following the Suez Crisis in 1956, Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser agreed to allow the United Nations Emergency Force to establish itself in the Sinai Peninsula and Gaza Strip, precipitating the expulsion of all guerrilla or "fedayeen" forces there—including Arafat. Arafat originally attempted to obtain a visa to Canada and later Saudi Arabia, but was unsuccessful in both attempts.[19] In 1957, he applied for a visa to Kuwait (at the time a British protectorate) and was approved, based on his work in civil engineering. There he encountered two Palestinian friends: Salah Khalaf ("Abu Iyad") and Khalil al-Wazir ("Abu Jihad"), both official members of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood. Arafat had met Abu Iyad while attending Cairo University and Abu Jihad in Gaza. Both would later become Arafat's top aides. Abu Iyad traveled with Arafat to Kuwait in late 1960; Abu Jihad, also working as a teacher, had already been living there since 1959.[29] After settling in Kuwait, Abu Iyad helped Arafat obtain a temporary job as a schoolteacher.[30]

As Arafat began to develop friendships with Palestinian refugees (some of whom he knew from his Cairo days), he and the others gradually founded the group that became known as Fatah. The exact date for the establishment of Fatah is unknown. In 1959, the group's existence was attested to in the pages of a Palestinian nationalist magazine, Filastununa Nida al-Hayat (Our Palestine, The Call of Life), which was written and edited by Abu Jihad.[31] FaTaH is a reverse acronym of the Arabic name Harakat al-Tahrir al-Watani al-Filastini which translates into "The Palestinian National Liberation Movement".[30][32] "Fatah" is also a word that was used in early Islamic times to refer to "conquest."[30]

Fatah dedicated itself to the liberation of Palestine by an armed struggle carried out by Palestinians themselves. This differed from other Palestinian political and guerrilla organizations, most of which firmly believed in a united Arab response.[30][33] Arafat's organization never embraced the ideologies of the major Arab governments of the time, in contrast to other Palestinian factions, which often became satellites of nations such as Egypt, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Syria and others.[34]

In accordance with his ideology, Arafat generally refused to accept donations to his organization from major Arab governments, in order to act independently of them. He did not want to alienate them, and sought their undivided support by avoiding ideological alliances. However, to establish the groundwork for Fatah's future financial support, he enlisted contributions from the many wealthy Palestinians working in Kuwait and other Arab states of the Persian Gulf, such as Qatar (where he met Mahmoud Abbas in 1961).[35] These businessmen and oil workers contributed generously to the Fatah organization. Arafat continued this process in other Arab countries, such as Libya and Syria.[30]

In 1962, Arafat and his closest companions migrated to Syria—a country sharing a border with Israel—which had recently seceded from its union with Egypt. Fatah had approximately three hundred members by this time, but none were fighters.[30] In Syria, he managed to recruit members by offering them higher incomes to enable his armed attacks against Israel. Fatah's manpower was incremented further after Arafat decided to offer new recruits much higher salaries than members of the Palestine Liberation Army (PLA), the regular military force of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which was created by the Arab League in 1964. On 31 December, a squad from al-Assifa, Fatah's armed wing, attempted to infiltrate Israel, but they were intercepted and detained by Lebanese security forces. Several other raids with Fatah's poorly trained and badly-equipped fighters followed this incident. Some were successful, others failed in their missions. Arafat often led these incursions personally.[30]

Arafat was detained in Syria's Mezzeh Prison when a Palestinian Syrian Army officer, Yusef Urabi, was killed. Urabi had been chairing a meeting to ease tensions between Arafat and Palestinian Liberation Front leader Ahmed Jibril, but neither Arafat nor Jibril attended, delegating representatives to attend on their behalf. Urabi was killed during or after the meeting amid disputed circumstances. On the orders of Defense Minister Hafez al-Assad, a close friend of Urabi, Arafat was subsequently arrested, found guilty by a three-man jury and sentenced to death. However, he and his colleagues were pardoned by President Salah Jadid shortly after the verdict.[36] The incident brought Assad and Arafat to unpleasant terms, which would surface later when Assad became President of Syria.[30]

Leader of the Palestinians
On 13 November 1966, Israel launched a major raid against the Jordanian administered West Bank town of as-Samu, in response to a Fatah-implemented roadside bomb attack which had killed three members of the Israeli security forces near the southern Green Line border. In the resulting skirmish, scores of Jordanian security forces were killed and 125 homes razed. This raid was one of several factors that led to the 1967 Six-Day War.[37]

The Six-Day war began when Israel launched air strikes against Egypt's air force on 5 June 1967. The war ended in an Arab defeat and Israel's occupation of several Arab territories, including the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Although Nasser and his Arab allies had been defeated, Arafat and Fatah could claim a victory, in that the majority of Palestinians, who had up to that time tended to align and sympathize with individual Arab governments, now began to agree that a 'Palestinian' solution to their dilemma was indispensable.[38] Many primarily Palestinian political parties, including George Habash's Arab Nationalist Movement, Hajj Amin al-Husseini's Arab Higher Committee, the Islamic Liberation Front and several Syrian-backed groups, virtually crumbled after their sponsor governments' defeat. Barely a week after the defeat, Arafat crossed the Jordan River in disguise and entered the West Bank, where he set up recruitment centers in Hebron, the Jerusalem area and Nablus, and began attracting both fighters and financiers for his cause.[38]

At the same time, Nasser contacted Arafat through the former's adviser Mohammed Heikal and Arafat was declared by Nasser to be the "leader of the Palestinians."[39] In December 1967 Ahmad Shukeiri resigned his post as PLO Chairman. Yahya Hammuda took his place and invited Arafat to join the organization. Fatah was allocated 33 of 105 seats of the PLO Executive Committee while 57 seats were left for several other guerrilla factions.[38]

Battle of Karameh
Main article: Battle of Karameh
Throughout 1968, Fatah and other Palestinian armed groups were the target of a major Israeli army operation in the Jordanian village of Karameh, where the Fatah headquarters—as well as a mid-sized Palestinian refugee camp—were located. The town's name is the Arabic word for 'dignity', which elevated its symbolism in the eyes of the Arab people, especially after the collective Arab defeat in 1967. The operation was in response to attacks, including rockets strikes from Fatah and other Palestinian militias, within the Israeli-occupied West Bank. According to Said Aburish, the government of Jordan and a number of Fatah commandos informed Arafat that large-scale Israeli military preparations for an attack on the town were underway, prompting fedayeen groups, such as George Habash's newly formed Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and Nayef Hawatmeh's breakaway organization the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), to withdraw their forces from the town. Though advised by a sympathetic Jordanian Army divisional commander to withdraw his men and headquarters to the nearby hills, Arafat refused,[38] stating, "We want to convince the world that there are those in the Arab world who will not withdraw or flee."[40] Aburish writes that it was on Arafat's orders that Fatah remained, and that the Jordanian Army agreed to back them if heavy fighting ensued.[38]

In response to persistent PLO raids against Israeli civilian targets, Israel attacked the town of Karameh, Jordan, the site of a major PLO camp. The goal of the invasion was to destroy Karameh camp and capture Yasser Arafat in reprisal for the attacks by the PLO against Israeli civilians, which culminated in an Israeli school bus hitting a mine in the Negev, killing two children.[41] However, plans for the two operations were prepared in 1967, one year before the bus attack.[42] The size of the Israeli forces entering Karameh made the Jordanians assume that Israel was also planning to occupy the eastern bank of the Jordan River, including the Balqa Governorate, to create a situation similar to the Golan Heights, which Israel had captured just 10 months prior, to be used a bargaining chip.[43][44] Israel assumed that the Jordanian Army would ignore the invasion, but the latter fought alongside the Palestinians, opening heavy fire that inflicted losses upon the Israeli forces.[45] This engagement marked the first known deployment of suicide bombers by Palestinian forces.[46] The Israelis were repelled at the end of a day's battle, having destroyed most of the Karameh camp and taken around 141 PLO prisoners.[47] Both sides declared victory. On a tactical level, the battle went in Israel's favor[48] and the destruction of the Karameh camp was achieved.[49] However, the relatively high casualties were a considerable surprise for the Israel Defense Forces and was stunning to the Israelis.[50] Although the Palestinians were not victorious on their own, King Hussein let the Palestinians take credit.[50][51][52] Some have alleged that Arafat himself was on the battlefield, but the details of his involvement are unclear. However, his allies–as well as Israeli intelligence–confirm that he urged his men throughout the battle to hold their ground and continue fighting.[53] The battle was covered in detail by Time, and Arafat's face appeared on the cover of the 13 December 1968 issue, bringing his image to the world for the first time.[54] Amid the post-war environment, the profiles of Arafat and Fatah were raised by this important turning point, and he came to be regarded as a national hero who dared to confront Israel. With mass applause from the Arab world, financial donations increased significantly, and Fatah's weaponry and equipment improved. The group's numbers swelled as many young Arabs, including thousands of non-Palestinians, joined the ranks of Fatah.[55]

When the Palestinian National Council (PNC) convened in Cairo on 3 February 1969, Yahya Hammuda stepped down from his chairmanship of the PLO. Arafat was elected chairman on 4 February.[56][57] He became Commander-in-Chief of the Palestinian Revolutionary Forces two years later, and in 1973, became the head of the PLO's political department.[38]

Confrontation with Jordan
See also: Black September

Arafat with Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine leader, Nayef Hawatmeh and Palestinian writer Kamal Nasser at press conference in Amman, 1970
In the late 1960s, tensions between Palestinians and the Jordanian government increased greatly; heavily armed Palestinian elements had created a virtual "state within a state" in Jordan, eventually controlling several strategic positions in that country. After their proclaimed victory in the Battle of Karameh, Fatah and other Palestinian militias began taking control of civil life in Jordan. They set up roadblocks, publicly humiliated Jordanian police forces, molested women and levied illegal taxes—all of which Arafat either condoned or ignored.[40] King Hussein considered this a growing threat to his kingdom's sovereignty and security, and attempted to disarm the militias. However, in order to avoid a military confrontation with opposition forces, Hussein dismissed several of his anti-PLO cabinet officials, including some of his own family members, and invited Arafat to become Deputy Prime Minister of Jordan. Arafat refused, citing his belief in the need for a Palestinian state with Palestinian leadership.[58]

Despite Hussein's intervention, militant actions in Jordan continued. On 15 September 1970, the PFLP (part of the PLO) hijacked four planes and landed three of them at Dawson's Field, located 30 miles (48 km) east of Amman. After the foreign national hostages were taken off the planes and moved away from them, three of the planes were blown up in front of international press, which took photos of the explosion. This tarnished Arafat's image in many western nations, including the United States, who held him responsible for controlling Palestinian factions that belonged to the PLO. Arafat, bowing to pressure from Arab governments, publicly condemned the hijackings and suspended the PFLP from any guerrilla actions for a few weeks. He had taken the same action after the PFLP attacked Athens Airport. The Jordanian government moved to regain control over its territory, and the next day, King Hussein declared martial law.[58] On the same day, Arafat became supreme commander of the PLA.[59]


Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser (center) mediating an agreement between Arafat and Jordanian King Hussein to end to the Black September conflict, during the emergency Arab League summit, September 1970
As the conflict raged, other Arab governments attempted to negotiate a peaceful resolution. As part of this effort, Gamal Abdel Nasser led the first emergency Arab League summit in Cairo on 21 September. Arafat's speech drew sympathy from attending Arab leaders. Other heads of state took sides against Hussein, among them Muammar Gaddafi, who mocked him and his schizophrenic father King Talal. A ceasefire was agreed upon between the two sides, but Nasser died of a massive heart attack hours after the summit, and the conflict resumed shortly afterward.[58]

By 25 September, the Jordanian Army achieved dominance, and two days later Arafat and Hussein agreed to a ceasefire in Amman. The Jordanian Army inflicted heavy casualties on the Palestinians—including civilians—who suffered approximately 3,500 fatalities.[59] After repeated violations of the ceasefire from both the PLO and the Jordanian Army, Arafat called for King Hussein to be toppled. Responding to the threat, in June 1971, Hussein ordered his forces to oust all remaining Palestinian fighters in northern Jordan, which they accomplished. Arafat and a number of his forces, including two high-ranking commanders, Abu Iyad and Abu Jihad, were forced into the northern corner of Jordan. They relocated near the town of Jerash, near the border with Syria. With the help of Munib Masri, a pro-Palestinian Jordanian cabinet member, and Fahd al-Khomeimi, the Saudi ambassador to Jordan, Arafat managed to enter Syria with nearly two thousand of his fighters. However, due to the hostility of relations between Arafat and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad (who had since ousted President Salah Jadid), the Palestinian fighters crossed the border into Lebanon to join PLO forces in that country, where they set up their new headquarters.[60]

Headquarters in Lebanon
Official recognition

Yasser Arafat visits East Germany in 1971; background: Brandenburg Gate

Yasser Arafat with Bhim Singh, founder of Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers Party, in the 1970s
Because of Lebanon's weak central government, the PLO was able to operate virtually as an independent state.[61] During this time in the 1970s, numerous leftist PLO groups took up arms against Israel, carrying out attacks against civilians as well as military targets within Israel and outside of it.[62]

Two major incidents occurred in 1972. The Fatah subgroup Black September Organization hijacked Sabena Flight 572 en route to Vienna and forced it to land at the Ben Gurion International Airport in Israel.[63] The PFLP and the Japanese Red Army carried out a shooting rampage at the same airport, killing twenty-four civilians.[63][64] Israel later claimed that the assassination of PFLP spokesman Ghassan Kanafani was a response to the PFLP's involvement in masterminding the latter attack. Two days later, various PLO factions retaliated by bombing a bus station, killing eleven civilians.[63]

At the Munich Olympic Games, Black September kidnapped and killed eleven Israeli athletes.[65] A number of sources, including Mohammed Oudeh (Abu Daoud), one of the masterminds of the Munich massacre, and Benny Morris, a prominent Israeli historian, have stated that Black September was an armed branch of Fatah used for paramilitary operations. According to Abu Daoud's 1999 book, "Arafat was briefed on plans for the Munich hostage-taking."[66] The killings were internationally condemned. In 1973–74, Arafat closed Black September down, ordering the PLO to withdraw from acts of violence outside Israel, the West Bank and Gaza Strip.[67]

In 1974, the PNC approved the Ten Point Program (drawn up by Arafat and his advisers), and proposed a compromise with the Israelis. It called for a Palestinian national authority over every part of "liberated" Palestinian territory,[68] which refers to areas captured by Arab forces in the 1948 Arab–Israeli War (present-day West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza Strip). This caused discontent among several of the PLO factions; the PFLP, DFLP and other parties formed a breakaway organization, the Rejectionist Front.[69]

Israel and the US have alleged also that Arafat was involved in the 1973 Khartoum diplomatic assassinations, in which five diplomats and five others were killed. A 1973 United States Department of State document, declassified in 2006, concluded "The Khartoum operation was planned and carried out with the full knowledge and personal approval of Yasser Arafat."[70][71] Arafat denied any involvement in the operation and insisted it was carried out independently by the Black September Organization. Israel claimed that Arafat was in ultimate control over these organizations and therefore had not abandoned terrorism.[72]

In addition, some circles within the US State Department viewed Arafat as an able diplomat and negotiator who could get support from many Arab governments at once. An example of that, we find in March 1973 that Arafat tried to arrange for a meeting between the President of Iraq and the Emir of Kuwait in order to resolve their disputes.[73]

Also in 1974, the PLO was declared the "sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people" and admitted to full membership of the Arab League at the Rabat Summit.[69] Arafat became the first representative of a non-governmental organization to address a plenary session of the UN General Assembly. In his United Nations address, Arafat condemned Zionism, but said:

Today I have come bearing an olive branch in one hand and a freedom fighter's rifle in another. Do not let the green branch fall from my hand.[74]

He wore a holster throughout his speech, although it did not contain a gun.[75][76] His speech increased international sympathy for the Palestinian cause.[69]

Following recognition, Arafat established relationships with a variety of world leaders, including Saddam Hussein and Idi Amin. Arafat was Amin's best man at his wedding in Uganda in 1975.[77][78]

Fatah involvement in Lebanese Civil War
See also: Lebanese Civil War and Battle of Tripoli (1983)

Arafat in a Palestinian refugee camp in Southern Lebanon, 1978
Although hesitant at first to take sides in the conflict, Arafat and Fatah played an important role in the Lebanese Civil War. Succumbing to pressure from PLO sub-groups such as the PFLP, DFLP and the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF), Arafat aligned the PLO with the Communist and Nasserist Lebanese National Movement (LNM). The LNM was led by Kamal Jumblatt, who had a friendly relationship with Arafat and other PLO leaders. Although originally aligned with Fatah, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad feared a loss of influence in Lebanon and switched sides. He sent his army, along with the Syrian-backed Palestinian factions of as-Sa'iqa and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – General Command (PFLP-GC) led by Ahmad Jibril to fight alongside right-wing Christian forces against the PLO and the LNM. The primary components of the Christian front were the Phalangists loyal to Bachir Gemayel and the Tigers Militia led by Dany Chamoun, a son of former President Camille Chamoun.[79]

In February 1975, a pro-Palestinian Lebanese MP, Maarouf Saad, was shot and killed, reportedly by the Lebanese Army.[80] His death from his wounds, the following month, and the massacre in April of 27 Palestinians and Lebanese travelling on a bus from Sabra and Shatila to the Tel al-Zaatar refugee camp by Phalangist forces precipitated the Lebanese Civil War.[81] Arafat was reluctant to respond with force, but many other Fatah and PLO members felt otherwise.[40] For example, the DFLP carried out several attacks against the Lebanese Army. In 1976, an alliance of Christian militias with the backing of the Lebanese and Syrian armies besieged Tel al-Zaatar camp in east Beirut.[82][83] The PLO and LNM retaliated by attacking the town of Damour, a Phalangist stronghold where they massacred 684 people and wounded many more.[82][84] The Tel al-Zaatar camp fell to the Christians after a six-month siege in which thousands of Palestinians, mostly civilians, were killed.[85] Arafat and Abu Jihad blamed themselves for not successfully organizing a rescue effort.[79]


Arafat with Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish (center) and PFLP leader George Habash (right) in Syria, 1980
PLO cross-border raids against Israel grew during the late 1970s. One of the most severe—known as the Coastal Road massacre—occurred on 11 March 1978. A force of nearly a dozen Fatah fighters landed their boats near a major coastal road connecting the city of Haifa with Tel Aviv-Yafo. There they hijacked a bus and sprayed gunfire inside and at passing vehicles, killing thirty-seven civilians.[86] In response, the IDF launched Operation Litani three days later, with the goal of taking control of Southern Lebanon up to the Litani River. The IDF achieved this goal, and Arafat withdrew PLO forces north into Beirut.[87]


Arafat with Iranian Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan, days after Iranian Revolution
After Israel withdrew from Lebanon, cross-border hostilities between PLO forces and Israel continued, though from August 1981 to May 1982, the PLO adopted an official policy of refraining from responding to provocations.[88] On 6 June 1982, Israel launched an invasion of Lebanon to expel the PLO from southern Lebanon. Beirut was soon besieged and bombarded by the IDF;[79] Arafat declared the city to be the "Hanoi and Stalingrad of the Israeli army."[79] The Civil War's first phase ended and Arafat—who was commanding Fatah forces at Tel al-Zaatar—narrowly escaped with assistance from Saudi and Kuwaiti diplomats.[89] Towards the end of the siege, the US and European governments brokered an agreement guaranteeing safe passage for Arafat and the PLO—guarded by a multinational force of eight hundred US Marines supported by the United States Navy—to exile in Tunis.[79]

During the war, Arafat took measures to protect the Lebanese Jewish community.[90] He ordered the PLO fighters to guard the Maghen Abraham Synagogue of Beirut and deliver food to affected Jewish families.[90] After Arafat left Lebanon, the synagogue's protection went in hands of Phalangists.[90]

Arafat returned to Lebanon a year after his eviction from Beirut, this time establishing himself in the northern Lebanese city of Tripoli. This time Arafat was expelled by a fellow Palestinian working under Hafez al-Assad. Arafat did not return to Lebanon after his second expulsion, though many Fatah fighters did.[79]

Headquarters in Tunisia
Arafat and Fatah's center for operations was based in Tunis, the capital of Tunisia, until 1993. In 1985 Arafat narrowly survived an Israeli assassination attempt when Israeli Air Force F-15s bombed his Tunis headquarters as part of Operation Wooden Leg, leaving 73 people dead; Arafat had gone out jogging that morning.[91] The following year Arafat had his operational headquarters in Baghdad for some time.[92]

First Intifada
During the 1980s, Arafat received financial assistance from Libya, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, which allowed him to reconstruct the badly damaged PLO. This was particularly useful during the First Intifada in December 1987, which began as an uprising of Palestinians against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The word Intifada in Arabic is literally translated as "tremor"; however, it is generally defined as an uprising or revolt.[93]

The first stage of the Intifada began following an incident at the Erez checkpoint where four Palestinian residents of the Jabalya refugee camp were killed in a traffic accident involving an Israeli driver. Rumors spread that the deaths were a deliberate act of revenge for an Israeli shopper who was stabbed to death by a Palestinian in Gaza four days earlier. Mass rioting broke out, and within weeks, partly upon consistent requests by Abu Jihad, Arafat attempted to direct the uprising, which lasted until 1992–93. Abu Jihad had previously been assigned the responsibility of the Palestinian territories within the PLO command and, according to biographer Said Aburish, had "impressive knowledge of local conditions" in the Israeli-occupied territories. On 16 April 1988, as the Intifada was raging, Abu Jihad was assassinated in his Tunis household by an Israeli hit squad. Arafat had considered Abu Jihad as a PLO counterweight to local Palestinian leadership in the territories, and led a funeral procession for him in Damascus.[93]

The most common tactic used by Palestinians during the Intifada was throwing stones, molotov cocktails, and burning tires.[94] The local leadership in some West Bank towns commenced non-violent protests against Israeli occupation by engaging in tax resistance and other boycotts. Israel responded by confiscating large sums of money in house-to-house raids.[93][95] As the Intifada came to a close, new armed Palestinian groups—in particular Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ)—began targeting Israeli civilians with the new tactic of suicide bombings, and internal fighting amongst the Palestinians increased dramatically.[93]

Change in direction
In August 1970, Arafat declared: "Our basic aim is to liberate the land from the Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River. We are not concerned with what took place in June 1967 or in eliminating the consequences of the June war. The Palestinian revolution's basic concern is the uprooting of the Zionist entity from our land and liberating it."[96] However, in early 1976, at a meeting with US Senator Adlai Stevenson III, Arafat suggested that if Israel withdrew a "few kilometers" from parts of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and transferred responsibility to the UN, Arafat could give "something to show his people before he could acknowledge Israel's right to exist".[97]

On 15 November 1988, the PLO proclaimed the independent State of Palestine. Though he had frequently been accused of and associated with terrorism,[98][99][100] in speeches on 13 and 14 December Arafat repudiated 'terrorism in all its forms, including state terrorism'. He accepted UN Security Council Resolution 242 and Israel's right "to exist in peace and security" and[101] Arafat's statements were greeted with approval by the US administration, which had long insisted on these statements as a necessary starting point for official discussions between the US and the PLO. These remarks from Arafat indicated a shift away from one of the PLO's primary aims—the destruction of Israel (as entailed in the Palestinian National Covenant)–and toward the establishment of two separate entities: an Israeli state within the 1949 armistice lines, and an Arab state in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. On 2 April 1989, Arafat was elected by the Central Council of the Palestine National Council, the governing body of the PLO, to be the president of the proclaimed State of Palestine.[93]

Prior to the Gulf War in 1990–91, when the Intifada's intensity began to wear down, Arafat supported Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait and opposed the US-led coalition attack on Iraq. He made this decision without the consent of other leading members of Fatah and the PLO. Arafat's top aide Abu Iyad vowed to stay neutral and opposed an alliance with Saddam; on 17 January 1991, Abu Iyad was assassinated by the Abu Nidal Organization. Arafat's decision also severed relations with Egypt and many of the oil-producing Arab states that supported the US-led coalition. Many in the US also used Arafat's position as a reason to disregard his claims to being a partner for peace. After the end of hostilities, many Arab states that backed the coalition cut off funds to the PLO and began providing financial support for the organization's rival Hamas and other Islamist groups.[93] Arafat narrowly escaped death again on 7 April 1992, when an Air Bissau aircraft he was a passenger on crash-landed in the Libyan Desert during a sandstorm. Two pilots and an engineer were killed; Arafat was bruised and shaken.[102]

Palestinian Authority and peace negotiations
Further information: Palestinian views on the peace process § Yasser Arafat and the PLO
Oslo Accords

Yitzhak Rabin, Bill Clinton, and Arafat during the Oslo Accords on 13 September 1993

Arafat, Shimon Peres and Rabin receiving the Nobel Peace Prize following the Oslo Accords, 10 December 1994
In the early 1990s, Arafat and leading Fatah officials engaged the Israeli government in a series of secret talks and negotiations that led to the 1993 Oslo Accords.[72][103] The agreement called for the implementation of Palestinian self-rule in portions of the West Bank and Gaza Strip over a five-year period, along with an immediate halt to and gradual removal of Israeli settlements in those areas. The accords called for a Palestinian police force to be formed from local recruits and Palestinians abroad, to patrol areas of self-rule. Authority over the various fields of rule, including education and culture, social welfare, direct taxation and tourism, would be transferred to the Palestinian interim government. Both parties agreed also on forming a committee that would establish cooperation and coordination dealing with specific economic sectors, including utilities, industry, trade and communication.[104]

Prior to signing the accords, Arafat—as Chairman of the PLO and its official representative—signed two letters renouncing violence and officially recognizing Israel. In return, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, on behalf of Israel, officially recognized the PLO.[105] The following year, Arafat and Rabin were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, along with Shimon Peres.[106] The Palestinian reaction was mixed. The Rejectionist Front of the PLO allied itself with Islamists in a common opposition against the agreements. It was rejected also by Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan as well as by many Palestinian intellectuals and the local leadership of the Palestinian territories. However, the inhabitants of the territories generally accepted the agreements and Arafat's promise for peace and economic well-being.[107]

Establishing authority in the territories
In accordance with the terms of the Oslo agreement, Arafat was required to implement PLO authority in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He insisted that financial support was imperative to establishing this authority and needed it to secure the acceptance of the agreements by the Palestinians living in those areas. However, Arab states of the Persian Gulf—Arafat's usual source for financial backing—still refused to provide him and the PLO with any major donations for siding with Iraq during the 1991 Gulf War.[107] Ahmed Qurei—a key Fatah negotiator during the negotiations in Oslo—publicly announced that the PLO was bankrupt.[108]

In 1994, Arafat moved to Gaza City, which was controlled by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA)—the provisional entity created by the Oslo Accords.[106] Arafat became the President and Prime Minister of the PNA, the Commander of the PLA and the Speaker of the PLC. In July, after the PNA was declared the official government of the Palestinians, the Basic Laws of the Palestinian National Authority was published,[109] in three different versions by the PLO. Arafat proceeded with creating a structure for the PNA. He established an executive committee or cabinet composed of twenty members. Arafat also replaced and assigned mayors and city councils for major cities such as Gaza and Nablus. He began subordinating non-governmental organizations that worked in education, health, and social affairs under his authority by replacing their elected leaders and directors with PNA officials loyal to him. He then appointed himself chairman of the Palestinian financial organization that was created by the World Bank to control most aid money towards helping the new Palestinian entity.[107]

Arafat appointed Moshe Hirsch as the Minister of Jewish Affairs in 1995.[110] Arafat established a Palestinian police force, named the Preventive Security Service (PSS), that became active on 13 May 1994. It was mainly composed of PLA soldiers and foreign Palestinian volunteers. Arafat assigned Mohammed Dahlan and Jibril Rajoub to head the PSS.[107] Amnesty International accused Arafat and the PNA leadership of failing to adequately investigate abuses by the PSS (including torture and unlawful killings) against political opponents and dissidents as well as the arrests of human rights activists.[111]

Throughout November and December 1995, Arafat toured dozens of Palestinian cities and towns that were evacuated by Israeli forces including Jenin, Ramallah, al-Bireh, Nablus, Qalqilyah and Tulkarm, declaring them "liberated". The PNA also gained control of the West Bank's postal service during this period.[112] On 20 January 1996, Arafat was elected president of the PNA, with an overwhelming 88.2 percent majority (the other candidate was charity organizer Samiha Khalil). However, because Hamas, the DFLP and other popular opposition movements chose to boycott the presidential elections, the choices were limited. Arafat's landslide victory guaranteed Fatah 51 of the 88 seats in the PLC. After Arafat was elected to the post of President of the PNA, he was often referred to as the Ra'is, (literally president in Arabic), although he spoke of himself as "the general".[113] In 1997, the PLC accused the executive branch of the PNA of financial mismanagement causing the resignation of four members of Arafat's cabinet. Arafat refused to resign his post.[114]

Other peace agreements

Arafat with PNA cabinet members Yasser Abed Rabbo (left) and Nabil Shaath (right) at a meeting in Copenhagen, 1999
In mid-1996, Benjamin Netanyahu was elected Prime Minister of Israel. Palestinian-Israeli relations grew even more hostile as a result of continued conflict.[115] Despite the Israel-PLO accord, Netanyahu opposed the idea of Palestinian statehood.[116] In 1998, US President Bill Clinton persuaded the two leaders to meet. The resulting Wye River Memorandum detailed the steps to be taken by the Israeli government and PNA to complete the peace process.[117]


Arafat with Ehud Barak and Bill Clinton at Camp David Summit, 2000
Arafat continued negotiations with Netanyahu's successor, Ehud Barak, at the Camp David 2000 Summit in July 2000. Due partly to his own politics (Barak was from the leftist Labor Party, whereas Netanyahu was from the rightist Likud Party) and partly due to insistence for compromise by President Clinton, Barak offered Arafat a Palestinian state in 73 percent of the West Bank and all of the Gaza Strip. The Palestinian percentage of sovereignty would extend to 90 percent over a ten- to twenty-five-year period. Also included in the offer was the return of a small number of refugees and compensation for those not allowed to return. Palestinians would also have "custodianship" over Al-Aqsa, sovereignty on all Islamic and Christian holy sites, and three of Jerusalem's four Old City quarters. Arafat rejected Barak's offer and refused to make an immediate counter-offer.[103] He told President Clinton that, "the Arab leader who would surrender Jerusalem is not born yet."[118]

After the September 2000 outbreak of the Second Intifada, negotiations continued at the Taba summit in January 2001; this time, Ehud Barak pulled out of the talks to campaign in the Israeli elections. In October and December 2001, suicide bombings by Palestinian militant groups increased and Israeli counter strikes intensified. Following the election of Ariel Sharon in February, the peace process took a steep downfall. Palestinian elections scheduled for January 2002 were postponed—the stated reason was an inability to campaign due to the emergency conditions imposed by the Intifada, as well as IDF incursions and restrictions on freedom of movement in the Palestinian territories. In the same month, Sharon ordered Arafat to be confined to his Mukata'a headquarters in Ramallah, following an attack in the Israeli city of Hadera;[118] US President George W. Bush supported Sharon's action, claiming that Arafat was "an obstacle to the peace."[119]

Political survival
Duration: 3 minutes and 30 seconds.3:30
Footage of Arafat speaking and meeting international leaders
Arafat's long personal and political survival was taken by most Western commentators as a sign of his mastery of asymmetric warfare and his skill as a tactician, given the extremely dangerous nature of politics of the Middle East and the frequency of assassinations.[120] Some commentators believe his survival was largely due to Israel's fear that he could become a martyr for the Palestinian cause if he were assassinated or even arrested by Israel.[121] Others believe that Israel refrained from taking action against Arafat because it feared Arafat less than Hamas and the other Islamist movements gaining support over Fatah. The complex and fragile web of relations between the US, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and other Arab states contributed also to Arafat's longevity as the leader of the Palestinians.[120]

Israel attempted to assassinate Arafat on a number of occasions, but has never used its own agents, preferring instead to "turn" Palestinians close to the intended target, usually using blackmail.[122] According to Alan Hart, the Mossad's specialty is poison.[122] According to Abu Iyad, two attempts were made on Arafat's life by the Israeli Mossad and the Military Directorate in 1970.[123] In 1976, Abu Sa'ed, a Palestinian agent working for the Mossad, was enlisted in a plot to put poison pellets that looked like grains of rice in Arafat's food. Abu Iyad explains that Abu Sa'ed confessed after he received the order to go ahead, explaining that he was unable to go through with the plot because, "He was first of all a Palestinian and his conscience wouldn't let him do it."[124] Arafat claimed in a 1988 interview with Time that because of his fear of assassination by the Israelis, he never slept in the same place two nights in a row.[125]

Relations with Hamas and other militant groups
Arafat's ability to adapt to new tactical and political situations was perhaps tested by the rise of the Hamas and PIJ organizations, Islamist groups espousing rejectionist policies with Israel. These groups often bombed non-military targets, such as malls and movie theaters, to increase the psychological damage and civilian casualties. In the 1990s, these groups seemed to threaten Arafat's capacity to hold together a unified nationalist organization with a goal of statehood.[120]

An attack carried out by Hamas militants in March 2002 killed 29 Israeli civilians celebrating Passover, including many senior citizens.[126] In response, Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield, a major military offensive into major West Bank cities. Mahmoud al-Zahar, a Hamas leader in Gaza, stated in September 2010 that Arafat had instructed Hamas to launch what he termed "military operations" against Israel in 2000 when Arafat felt that negotiations with Israel would not succeed.[127]

Some Israeli government officials opined in 2002 that the armed Fatah sub-group al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades commenced attacks towards Israel in order to compete with Hamas.[128] On 6 May 2002, the Israeli government released a report, based in part on documents, allegedly captured during the Israeli raid of Arafat's Ramallah headquarters, which allegedly included copies of papers signed by Arafat authorizing funding for al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades' activities. The report implicated Arafat in the "planning and execution of terror attacks".[129]

Attempts to marginalize
Persistent attempts by the Israeli government to identify another Palestinian leader to represent the Palestinian people failed. Arafat was enjoying the support of groups that, given his own history, would normally have been quite wary of dealing with or supporting him. Marwan Barghouti (a leader of al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades) emerged as a possible replacement during the Second Intifada, but Israel had him arrested for allegedly being involved in the killing of twenty-six civilians, and he was sentenced to five life terms.[130]

Arafat was finally allowed to leave his compound on 2 May 2002 after intense negotiations led to a settlement: six PFLP militants, including the organization's secretary-general Ahmad Sa'adat, wanted by Israel, who had been holed up with Arafat in his compound, would be transferred to international custody in Jericho. After the wanted men were handed over the siege was lifted.[131] With that, and a promise that he would issue a call to the Palestinians to halt attacks on Israelis, Arafat was released. He issued such a call on 8 May. On 19 September 2002, the IDF largely demolished the compound with armored bulldozers in order to isolate Arafat.[132][133][134] In March 2003, Arafat ceded his post as Prime Minister to Mahmoud Abbas amid pressures by the US.[135]

The Israeli security Cabinet on 11 September 2003 decided that "Israel will act to remove this obstacle [Arafat] in the manner, at the time, and in the ways that will be decided on separately".[136] Israeli Cabinet members and officials hinted on Arafat's death,[137][138][139] the Israeli military had begun making preparations for Arafat's possible expulsion in the near future,[140][141] and many feared for his life. Israeli peace activists of Gush Shalom, Knesset members and others went into the Presidential Compound prepared to serve as a human shield.[142] The compound remained under siege until Arafat's transfer to a French hospital, shortly before his death.

In 2004, President Bush dismissed Arafat as a negotiating partner, saying he had "failed as a leader", and accused him of undercutting Abbas when he was prime minister (Abbas resigned the same year he was given the position).[143] Arafat had a mixed relationship with the leaders of other Arab nations. His support from Arab leaders tended to increase whenever he was pressured by Israel; for example, when Israel declared in 2003 it had made the decision, in principle, to remove him from the Israeli-controlled West Bank.[118] In an interview with the Arabic news network Al Jazeera, Arafat responded to Ariel Sharon's suggestion that he be exiled from the Palestinian territories permanently, by stating, "Is it his [Sharon's] homeland or ours? We were planted here before the Prophet Abraham came, but it looks like they [Israelis] don't understand history or geography."[118]

Financial dealings
Under the Oslo Peace Accords, Israel undertook to deposit the VAT tax receipts on goods purchased by Palestinians into the Palestinian treasury. Until 2000, these monies were transferred directly to Arafat's personal accounts at Bank Leumi, in Tel Aviv. [144]

In August 2002, the Israeli Military Intelligence Chief alleged that Arafat's personal wealth was in the range of US$1.3 billion.[145] In 2003 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) conducted an audit of the PNA and stated that Arafat had diverted $900 million in public funds to a special bank account controlled by himself and the PNA Chief Economic Financial adviser. However, the IMF did not claim that there were any improprieties, and it specifically stated that most of the funds had been used to invest in Palestinian assets, both internally and abroad.[146][147]

However, in 2003, a team of American accountants—hired by Arafat's own finance ministry—began examining Arafat's finances. In its conclusions, the team claimed that part of the Palestinian leader's wealth was in a secret portfolio worth close to $1 billion, with investments in companies like a Coca-Cola bottling plant in Ramallah, a Tunisian cell phone company and venture capital funds in the U.S. and the Cayman Islands. The head of the investigation stated that "although the money for the portfolio came from public funds like Palestinian taxes, virtually none of it was used for the Palestinian people; it was all controlled by Arafat. And none of these dealings were made public."[144] An investigation conducted by the General Accounting Office reported that Arafat and the PLO held over $10 billion in assets even at the time when he was publicly claiming bankruptcy.[148]

Although Arafat lived a modest lifestyle, Dennis Ross, former Middle East negotiator for Presidents George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton, stated that Arafat's "walking-around money" financed a vast patronage system known as neopatrimonialism. According to Salam Fayyad—a former World Bank official whom Arafat appointed Finance Minister of the PNA in 2002—Arafat's commodity monopolies could accurately be seen as gouging his own people, "especially in Gaza which is poorer, which is something that is totally unacceptable and immoral." Fayyad claims that Arafat used $20 million from public funds to pay the leadership of the PNA security forces (the Preventive Security Service) alone.[144]

Fuad Shubaki, former financial aide to Arafat, told the Israeli security service Shin Bet that Arafat used several million dollars of aid money to buy weapons and support militant groups.[149] During Israel's Operation Defensive Shield, the Israel army recovered counterfeit money and documents from Arafat's Ramallah headquarters. The documents showed that, in 2001, Arafat personally approved payments to Tanzim militants.[150] The Palestinians claimed that the counterfeit money was confiscated from criminal elements.[151]

Illness and death
Unsuccessful Israeli assassination attempts
The Israeli government tried for decades to assassinate Arafat, including attempting to intercept and shoot down private aircraft and commercial airliners on which he was believed to be traveling.[152] The assassination was initially assigned to Caesarea, the Mossad unit in charge of Israel's numerous targeted killings. Shooting down a commercial airliner in international airspace over very deep water was thought to be preferable to make recovery of the wreckage, and hence investigation, more difficult.[152] Following Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon, Israeli minister of defense Ariel Sharon created a special task force code named "Salt Fish" headed by special operations experts Meir Dagan and Rafi Eitan to track Arafat's movements in Lebanon to kill him because Sharon saw Arafat as a "Jew murderer" and an important symbol, symbols being as important as body counts in a war against a terrorist organization. The Salt Fish task force orchestrated the bombing of buildings where Arafat and senior PLO leaders were believed to be staying. Later renamed "Operation Goldfish", Israeli operatives followed Israeli journalist Uri Avnery to a meeting with Arafat in an additional unsuccessful attempt to kill him. In 2001, Sharon as prime minister is believed to have made a commitment to cease attempts to assassinate Arafat. However, following Israel's successful assassination in March 2004 of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, a founder of the Hamas movement, Sharon stated in April 2004 that "this commitment of mine no longer exists."[152]

Failing health
The first reports of Arafat's failing health by his doctors for what his spokesman said was influenza came on 25 October 2004, after he vomited during a staff meeting. His condition deteriorated in the following days.[153] Following visits by other doctors, including teams from Tunisia, Jordan, and Egypt—and agreement by Israel to allow him to travel—Arafat was flown from Ramallah to Jordan by a Jordanian military helicopter and from there to France on a French military plane. He was admitted to the Percy military hospital in Clamart, a suburb of Paris.[154][155][156] On 3 November, he had lapsed into a gradually deepening coma.[157]

Arafat was pronounced dead at 03:30 UTC on 11 November 2004 at the age of 75 of what French doctors called a massive hemorrhagic cerebrovascular accident (hemorrhagic stroke).[158][159] Initially, Arafat's medical records were withheld by senior Palestinian officials, and Arafat's wife refused an autopsy believing that it went against Muslim practices.[160] French doctors also said that Arafat suffered from a blood condition known as disseminated intravascular coagulation, although it is inconclusive what brought about the condition.[161][162] When Arafat's death was announced, the Palestinian people went into a state of mourning, with Qur'anic mourning prayers emitted from mosque loudspeakers throughout the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and tires burned in the streets.[163] The Palestinian Authority and refugee camps in Lebanon declared 40 days of mourning.[154][164]

Funeral

Arafat's "temporary" tomb in Ramallah, 2004

Wikinews has related news:
Brazilian delegation returns from Arafat funeral
On 11 November 2004, a French Army guard of honour held a brief ceremony for Arafat, with his coffin draped in a Palestinian flag. A military band played the French and Palestinian national anthems, and a Chopin funeral march.[165] French President Jacques Chirac stood alone beside Arafat's coffin for about ten minutes in a last show of respect for Arafat, whom he hailed as "a man of courage".[166] The next day, Arafat's body was flown from Paris aboard a French Air Force transport plane to Cairo, Egypt, for a brief military funeral there, attended by several heads of states, prime ministers and foreign ministers.[167] Egypt's top Muslim cleric Sayed Tantawi led mourning prayers preceding the funeral procession.[154]


Honour guard at attention over Yasser Arafat's tombstone in mausoleum, opened 10 November 2007 at the PNA presidential headquarters in Ramallah
Israel refused Arafat's wish to be buried near the Masjid Al-Aqsa or anywhere in Jerusalem, citing security concerns.[168] Israel also feared that his burial would strengthen Palestinian claims to East Jerusalem.[169] Following the Cairo procession, Arafat was "temporarily" buried within the Mukataa in Ramallah; tens of thousands of Palestinians attended the ceremony.[154] Arafat was buried in a stone, rather than wooden, coffin, and Palestinian spokesman Saeb Erekat said that Arafat would be reburied in East Jerusalem following the establishment of a Palestinian state. After Sheikh Taissir Tamimi discovered that Arafat was buried improperly and in a coffin—which is not in accordance with Islamic law—Arafat was reburied on the morning of 13 November at around 3:00 am.[170] On 10 November 2007, prior to the third anniversary of Arafat's death, President Mahmoud Abbas unveiled a mausoleum for Arafat near his tomb in commemoration of him.[171]

Theories about the cause of death
Main article: Death of Yasser Arafat

Arafat mausoleum
Numerous theories have circulated regarding Arafat's death, with the most prominent being poisoning[172][173][174][175] (possibly by polonium) and[176] AIDS-related illnesses,[177][178][179] as well as liver disease[180] or a platelet disorder.[181]

In September 2005, an Israeli AIDS expert claimed that Arafat bore all the symptoms of AIDS based on obtained medical records.[177] But others, including Patrice Mangin of the University of Lausanne and The New York Times, disagreed with this claim, insisting that Arafat's record indicated that it was highly unlikely that the cause of his death was AIDS.[182][160] Arafat's personal doctor Ashraf al-Kurdi and aide Bassam Abu Sharif maintained that Arafat was poisoned,[172][173] possibly by thallium.[174] A senior Israeli physician concluded that Arafat died from food poisoning.[177] Both Israeli and Palestinian officials have denied claims that Arafat was poisoned.[177][183] Palestinian foreign minister Nabil Shaath ruled out poisoning after talks with Arafat's French doctors.[183]

On 4 July 2012, Al Jazeera published the results of a nine-month investigation, which found that rumors Arafat had died of cancer, cirrhosis, or AIDS were not true, because he was in good health until he fell ill suddenly on 12 October 2004 – but revealed that tests carried out by Swiss experts found traces of polonium in quantities much higher than could occur naturally on Arafat's personal belongings.[182][184] On 12 October 2013, the British medical journal The Lancet published a peer-reviewed article by the Swiss experts about the analysis of the 38 samples of Arafat's clothes and belongings and 37 reference samples which were known to be polonium-free, suggesting that Arafat could have died of polonium poisoning.[185][186]

On 27 November 2012, three teams of international investigators, a French, a Swiss, and a Russian team, collected samples from Arafat's body and the surrounding soil in the mausoleum in Ramallah, to carry out an investigation independently from each other.[187][188][189]

On 6 November 2013, Al Jazeera reported that the Swiss forensic team had found levels of polonium in Arafat's ribs and pelvis 18 to 36 times the average,[8][190] even though by this point in time the amount had diminished by a factor of 2 million.[186] François Bochud, the head of the Swiss team, said that the poisoning hypothesis by polonium is "reasonably supported",[191] while forensic scientist Dave Barclay, retained by Al Jazeera, stated, "In my opinion, it is absolutely certain that the cause of his illness was polonium poisoning. ... What we have got is the smoking gun – the thing that caused his illness and was given to him with malice."[192][8] Derek Hill, a professor in radiological science at University College London who was not involved in the investigation, said "I would say it's clearly not overwhelming proof, and there is a risk of contamination (of the samples), but it is a pretty strong signal. ... It seems likely what they're doing is putting a very cautious interpretation of strong data."[7]

But on 26 December 2013, a team of Russian scientists released a report saying they had found no trace of radioactive poisoning—a finding that came after the French report found traces of polonium. Vladimir Uiba, the head of the Federal Medical and Biological Agency, said that Arafat died of natural causes and the agency had no plans to conduct further tests.[193] Unlike the Swiss report, the French and Russian reports were not made public at the time.[186] The Swiss experts read the French and Russian reports and argued that the radiologic data measured by the other teams supported their conclusions of a probable death by polonium poisoning.[186] In March 2015, a French prosecutor closed a 2012 French inquiry, stating that French experts maintained that the polonium and lead traces found were of an environmental nature.[194] Palestinian official Wasel Abu Yousef said of the 2013 report, "The French report is politicized and is contrary to all the evidence which confirms that the president was killed by poisoning", and "This report is an attempt to cover up what happened in Percy hospital."[195]

Legacy
Places named in his honor include:

Martyr Yasser Arafat Governmental Hospital
Yasser Arafat Cup
Yasser Arafat International Airport
See also
	Biography portal
flag	Palestine portal
icon	Politics portal
Politics of Palestine
List of international trips made by Yasser Arafat
List of Fatah members
Arafat's Johannesburg Address
Notes
 Pronounced /ˈærəfæt/ ARR-ə-fat, US also /ˈɑːrəfɑːt/ AR-ə-faht;[2] Arabic: ياسر عرفات, romanized: Yāsir ʿArafāt, Levantine Arabic pronunciation: [ˈjaːsɪrˤ ʕɑrˤɑˈfaːt]; full birth name: Mohammed Abdel Rahman Abdel Raouf Arafat al-Qudwa al-Husseini (Arabic: محمد ياسر عبد الرحمن عبد الرؤوف عرفات القدوة الحسيني, romanized: Muḥammad Yāsir ʿAbd ar-Raḥman ʿAbd ar-Raʾūf ʿArafāt al-Qudwa al-Ḥusaynī).
 Arabic: أبو عمار, romanized: ʾAbū ʿAmmār.
References
 Helena Cobban (before Yasser Arafat's marriage): "Yasser Arafat is not married, but is called 'Abu 'Ammar' as an inversion of the name of the heroic early Muslim warrior 'Ammar bin ('son of) Yasser. The idea, presumably, that if Yasser Arafat had a son, he would or should be as heroic as the earlier Ammar [ibn Yasir]", Cobban 1984, p. 272
 "Definition of Arafat". dictionary.com. Random House. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Some sources use the term Chairman, rather than President; the Arabic word for both titles is the same. See President of the Palestinian National Authority for further information.
 "Yasser Arafat: French rule out foul play in former Palestinian leader's death". The Guardian. 16 March 2015.
 "France drops investigation into Arafat's death". The Jerusalem Post. Reuters. 2 September 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 "Yasser Arafat investigation: Russian probe finds death not caused by radiation". CBS News. 26 December 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 Tait, Robert (8 November 2013). "Arafat's body loaded with polonium, say scientists". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Poort, David; Silverstein, Ken (6 November 2013). "Swiss study: Polonium found in Arafat's bones". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Creed, Richard D. Jr. (2014). Eighteen Years in Lebanon and Two Intifadas: The Israeli Defense Force and the U.S. Army Operational Environment. Pickle Partners Publishing. p. 53. ISBN 978-1-78289-593-0.
 Ghanem, As'ad (2010). Palestinian Politics after Arafat: A Failed National Movement. Indiana University Press. p. 259.
 Kershner, Isabel (4 July 2012). "Palestinians May Exhume Arafat After Report of Poisoning". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 August 2012.
 Hockstader, Lee (11 November 2004). "A Dreamer Who Forced His Cause Onto World Stage". The Washington Post. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 Not certain; Disputed; Most sources including Tony Walker, Andrew Gowers, Alan Hart and Said K. Aburish indicate Cairo as Arafat's place of birth, but others list his birthplace as Jerusalem as well as Gaza. See Nobel Prize Biography and BBC Obituary for more information. Some believe also that the Jerusalem birthplace might have been a little known rumor created by the KGB (see Jewish Vitual Library).
 Kumaraswamy, P. R. (24 July 2009). The A to Z of the Arab-Israeli Conflict. Scarecrow Press. p. 26. ISBN 978-0-8108-7015-4.
 "Yasser Arafat Mausoleum". Alluring World. 17 March 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2019.
 Hart 1989, p. 67
 Dunn, Michael (2004). "Arafat, Yasir". In Mattar, Philip (ed.). Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East & North Africa: A–C. Vol. 1. Detroit: Macmillan Reference. pp. 269–272. ISBN 978-0-02-865769-1. Arafat and his family have always insisted that he was born 4 August 1929. in his mother's family home in Jerusalem. Nevertheless, an Egyptian birth registration exists, suggesting that he was born in Egypt on 24 August 1929...
 Brexel, Bernadette (2003). Yasser Arafat. Rosen Publishing Group. p. 12.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 7–32
 "Yasser Arafat: Homeland a dream for Palestinian Authority Chief". CNN. Archived from the original on 18 November 2001. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
 Rubenstein & Leon 1995, p. 38
 Aburish 1998, p. 46
 Aburish 1998, pp. 246–247
 "Profile: Suha Arafat". BBC News. 11 November 2004. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 "Milestones". Time. 19 December 1994.
 "Arafat's widow tried to leave Palestinian leader 'hundreds of times'". The Daily Star. 9 February 2013. Archived from the original on 16 August 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2013.
 Winer, Stuart (10 February 2013). "Suha Arafat: I wish I'd never married him". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 290
 Mattar, Phillip (12 November 2000). "Biography of Khalil al-Wazir (Abu Jihad)". Encyclopedia of the Palestinians. Facts on File; 1st edition. Archived from the original on 21 August 2006. Retrieved 17 July 2007.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 33–67
 Aburish 1998, pp. 33–67 Aburish says the date of Fatah's founding is unclear but claims in 1959 it was exposed by its magazine.
Zeev Schiff, Raphael Rothstein (1972). Fedayeen; Guerillas Against Israel. McKay, p.58; Schiff and Rothstein claim Fatah was founded in 1959.
Salah Khalaf and Khalil al-Wazir state Fatah's first formal meeting was in October 1959. See Anat N. Kurz (2005) Fatah and the Politics of Violence: The Institutionalization of a Popular Struggle. Brighton, Portland: Sussex Academic Press (Jaffee Centre for Strategic Studies), pp. 29–30
 Hussein, Hassan Khalil. Abu Iyad, Unknown Pages of his Life. p. 64.
 Cooley, John K. (1973). Green March, Black September. Frank Crass & Co. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-7146-2987-2.
 Abu Sharif, Bassam; Uzi Mahmaini (1996). Tried by Fire. Time Warner Paperbacks. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-7515-1636-4.
 Gowers, Andrew; Tony Walker (1991). Behind the Myth: Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian Revolution. Interlink Pub Group Inc. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-940793-86-6.
 Hart, Alan (1994). Arafat. Sidgwick and Jackson. pp. 204–205. ISBN 978-0-283-06220-9.
 Oren, Michael (2003). Six Days of War, June 1967 and the Making of the Modern Middle East. New York: The Random House Publishing Group. pp. 33–36. ISBN 978-0-345-46192-6.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 69–98
 Aburish, Said K. (2004). Nasser, The Last Arab. New York: Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 978-0-312-28683-5. OCLC 52766217.
 Sayigh, Yezid (1997). Armed Struggle and the Search for State, the Palestinian National Movement, 1949–1993. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-829643-0.
 Cath Senker (2004). The Arab-Israeli Conflict. Black Rabbit Books. ISBN 9781583404416. Retrieved 25 October 2015.[permanent dead link]
 Oren, Amir (29 March 1968). "Debacle in the desert". Haaretz. Retrieved 13 May 2011.
 Tyler, Patrick (18 September 2012). Fortress Israel: The Inside Story of the Military Elite Who Run the Country—and Why They Can't Make Peace. Macmillan. ISBN 9781429944472. Retrieved 25 October 2015.
 الذكرى الثالثة والأربعون لمعركة الكرامة الخالدة. Petra News Agency (in Arabic). Ammon News. 20 March 2011. Archived from the original on 18 April 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 "1968: Karameh and the Palestinian revolt". The Telegraph. 1 May 2002. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 Saada, Tass; Merrill, Dean (2008). Once an Arafat Man: The True Story of How a PLO Sniper Found a New Life. Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers. pp. 4–6. ISBN 978-1-4143-2361-9.
 Brady, Thomas F. (23 March 1968). "GUERRILLAS BACK AT JORDAN CAMP; Attack by Israelis Failed to Destroy Base at Karameh or Wipe Out Commandos". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 June 2024.(subscription required)
 Maoz, Zeev (2006). Defending the Holy Land: A Critical Analysis of Israel's Security and Foreign Policy. University of Michigan Press. pp. 244–246.
 Herzog. The Arab-Israeli Wars. p. 205.
 Spencer C. Tucker, Priscilla Roberts (12 May 2005). Encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli Conflict, The: A Political, Social, and Military History: A Political, Social, and Military History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781851098422. Retrieved 25 October 2015.
 Kathleen Sweet (23 December 2008). Aviation and Airport Security: Terrorism and Safety Concerns, Second Edition. CRC Press. ISBN 9781439894736. Retrieved 27 October 2015.
 "The Israeli Assessment". Time. 13 December 1968. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on 23 November 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2008.(subscription required)
 Livingstone, Neil; Halevy, David (1990). Inside the PLO. Reader's Digest Association. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-7090-4548-9.
 "The Guerrilla Threat In the Middle East". Time. 13 December 1968. Archived from the original on 8 February 2007. Retrieved 24 August 2007.
 Cobban, Helena (1984). The Palestine Liberation Organisation: People, Power and Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-27216-2.
 "A Fatah Chief To Lead Palestinian Liberation". The Morning Record. 6 February 1969. p. 9 – via Google News Archive Search.
 "Fatah Wins Control of Palestine Group" (PDF). The New York Times. 5 February 1969. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 100–112
 "Black September in Jordan 1970–1971". Armed Conflict Events Data. 16 December 2000. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Rasheda, Mahran. Arafat, the Difficult Number (in Arabic). Dar al-Hayan. pp. 175–181.
 Nisan, Mordechi (2003). The Conscience of Lebanon: A Political Biography of Ettiene Sakr (Abu-Arz). London, Portland, Oregon: Frank Cass. p. 20. ISBN 0-7146-5392-6.
 Metz, Helen Chapin, ed. (1988). "Israel in Lebanon". Israel: A Country Study. Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 122–125
 Sontag, Deborah (20 April 1999). "2 Who Share a Past Are Rivals for Israel's Future". The New York Times. pp. Section A, Page 3, Column 1.
 Klein, Aaron (2005). Striking Back: The 1972 Munich Olympics Massacre and Israel's Deadly Response. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-920769-80-2.
 Berger, Robert (5 September 2002). "Munich Massacre Remembered". CBS News. Archived from the original on 12 October 2002. Retrieved 17 July 2007.
 Morris, Benny (2001). Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881–2001. Vintage Books. p. 383. ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7.
 "Political Program Adopted at the 12th Session of the Palestine National Council". Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to the United Nations. 8 June 1974. Archived from the original on 28 January 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 140–142
 "The Seizure of the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Khartoum" (PDF). U.S. Department of State. 4 May 2006. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "William Rogers to the Embassy at Fort Lamy". 13 March 1973. Archived from the original on 13 November 2011. Retrieved 18 September 2017.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 252–261
 "'Arafat's "Mediation" Between Iraq and Kuwait". US Embassy in Beirut. 4 April 1973. Archived from the original on 13 November 2011. Retrieved 18 September 2017.
 "PLENARY MEETING Wednesday, 13 November 1974". United Nations. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
 Nichols, Mark (17 December 1977). "Five Minutes to Midnight". The Gazette (Montreal). Retrieved 5 July 2012. "All Yasser Arafat had in his holster at the UN was a pair of dark glasses."
 Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 319–320. ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4.
 Laville, Sandra (3 August 2007). "Big Daddy's boy: Idi Amin's son jailed in Britain over Somali gang murder". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Biographical Focus: Idi Amin". 14 April 2003. Archived from the original on 19 June 2006.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 150–175
 Mardelli, Bassil A. (2012). Middle East Perspectives: From Lebanon. iUniverse. p. 260. ISBN 9781475906721.
 Chomsky, Noam (1999). The Fateful Triangle: The United States, Israel and the Palestinians. South End Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-89608-601-2.
 "The Civil War... 1975, Regional Intervention". The Lebanese-American Association. Archived from the original on 5 February 1998.
 Harris, William (1996). Faces of Lebanon. Sects, Wars, and Global Extensions. Markus Wiener Publishers. pp. 162–165. ISBN 978-1-55876-115-5.
 Nisan 2003
 Harris, William. Faces of Lebanon. Sects, Wars, and Global Extensions. pp. 162–165. Perhaps 3,000 Palestinians, mostly civilians, died in the siege and its aftermath.
This source states that 2,000 were killed: "Lebanese war chronology 1975–1990". 111101.net. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 "133 Statement to the press by Prime Minister Begin on the massacre of Israelis on the Haifa – Tel Aviv Road". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 12 March 1978. Archived from the original on 15 August 2004. Retrieved 9 October 2007.
 "Time Line: Lebanon: Israel Controls South". BBC News. 9 October 2007. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007. Retrieved 9 October 2007.
 Chomsky, Noam (1999). Fatal Triangle. p. 346.
 "The Battle of Tel al-Zaatar". Liberty 05. Archived from the original on 9 May 2006. Retrieved 25 August 2007.
 Starr, Paul (24 November 2021). "Lebanese Jew Reached Out to Arafat to Protect Synagogue". Jewish Journal. Retrieved 18 October 2024.
 "92 Press Conference Following Israel Air Force Attack on PLO base in Tunis". Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 1 November 1985. Archived from the original on 11 March 2007. Retrieved 25 August 2007.
 Middle East International No 289, 5 December 1986; Publishers Lord Mayhew, Dennis Walters MP; Jim Muir pp.10–11; No 291, 9 January 1987; Jim Muir pp.3–4
 Aburish 1998, pp. 201–228
 Ron, Jonathan, An Analysis of the Strategies and Tactics of the Palestinians and Israelis, Tufts University
 A Matter of Justice: Tax Resistance in Beit Sahour-Nonviolent Sanctions, Albert Einstein Institution, Spring–Summer 1992
 Gilbert, Martin (1998). Israel: a history. Doubleday. p. 418. ISBN 978-0-385-40401-3.
 "Margaret P. Grafeld Declassified/Released US Department of State EO Systematic Review" (PDF). 4 May 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2013.
 Emmott, Bill (2004). 20:21 Vision: Twentieth-Century Lessons for the Twenty-First Century. Macmillan. p. 151.
 Younan, Munib; Strickert, Frederick M. (2003). Witnessing for Peace. Fortress Press. p. 111.
 Blankley, Tony (2005). The West's last chance. Regnery Publishing. p. 77.
 "Yasser Arafat, Speech at UN General Assembly Geneva, General Assembly 13 December 1988". Le Monde diplomatique. 13 December 1988. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 27 October 2021.
 "Timeline: Yasser Arafat". Fox News. Associated Press. 8 February 2005. Archived from the original on 4 August 2007. Retrieved 27 July 2007.
 Carter, James (2006). Palestine Peace Not Apartheid. New York: Simon & Schuster, Inc. pp. 147–150. ISBN 978-0-7432-8502-5.
 "Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area". Jewish Virtual Library. The American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. 4 May 1994. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Israel-PLO Recognition: Exchange of Letters Between PM Rabin and Chairman Arafat". U.S. State Department Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs. 3 September 1993. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "1994: Israelis and Arafat share peace prize". BBC News. 3 September 1993. Retrieved 16 June 2024.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 262–292
 Heikal, Mohammed (1996). Secret Channels. HarperCollins Publishing. p. 479. ISBN 978-0-00-638337-6.
 Constitution of Palestine (1994) Wikisource 26 July 2006. Accessed on17 June 2024.
 "Former Palestinian Jewish Minister Hirsch dies". Al Arabiya English. 2 May 2010. Retrieved 27 November 2024.
 Forgione, Fabio (October 2004). "The Chaos of Corruption, Challenges for the improvement of the Palestinian Society: VI. PA security service, 1. Abuses, torture and infringements of the law". The Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group (PHRMG). Archived from the original on 11 January 2008. Retrieved 4 November 2007.
 "Palestine Facts: 1994–1995". Palestinian Academic Society for the Study of International Affairs (PASSIA). Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2008.
 Miller, Judith (10 November 2004). "Obituary: Yasir Arafat, Palestinian Leader, Dies at 75". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 293–320
 "Profile: Binyamin Netanyahu". BBC News. 20 December 2005. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Hardliners Gain Around Likud Vote". BBC News. 9 December 2002. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "The Wye River Memorandum". The State of Israel (Translated from Hebrew). 23 October 1998. Archived from the original on 15 July 2001. Retrieved 24 August 2007.
 "Yasser Arafat (1929–2004)" (PDF). PASSIA. 11 December 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 February 2012.
 "Mid-East press reflects on Arafat legacy". BBC News. 5 November 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Aburish 1998, pp. 321–325
 Beyer, Lisa (12 November 2004). "A Life in Retrospect: Yasser Arafat". Time. p. 2. Archived from the original on 13 November 2004. Retrieved 24 August 2007.
 Hart 1989, p. 27
 Hart 1989, p. 320
 Hart 1989, pp. 429–430
 Prager, Karsten; Murray J. Gart; Yasser Arafat (7 November 1988). "Interview: with Yasser Arafat: Knowing the Enemy". Time. Archived from the original on 26 November 2010. Retrieved 30 January 2010.
 "Al-Aqsa Intifada timeline: 2002". BBC News. 29 September 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Abu Toameh, Khaled (29 September 2010). "Arafat ordered Hamas attacks against Israel in 2000". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 8 October 2010. This was the first time that a senior Hamas official disclosed that some of the Hamas suicide bombings during the second intifada, which erupted 10 years ago, were ordered by Arafat. Until now it was widely believed that Arafat had only ordered his Fatah militiamen to carry out terror attacks on Israel.
 Bowen, Jeremy (7 November 2003). "Palestinian Authority funds go to militants". BBC News. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Naveh, Dani (6 May 2002). "The Involvement of Arafat, PA Senior Officials and Apparatuses in Terrorism against Israel- Corruption and Crime". Ministry of Foreign Affairs – The State of Israel. Archived from the original on 21 November 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
 "Profile: Marwan Barghouti". BBC News. 20 May 2004. Archived from the original on 11 June 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Arafat siege to end as handover agreed". The Daily Telegraph. London. 1 May 2002. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Taylor & Francis Group (2004) Europa World Year Book 2: Kazakhstan-Zimbabwe Published by Taylor & Francis, ISBN 1-85743-255-X p 3314
 Schmemann, Serge (22 September 2002). "Arafat Remains Defiant Amid Rubble of His Compound". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Huggler, Justin (28 September 2002). "Israeli siege of Arafat 'is killing peace hope'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 1 June 2004. Retrieved 16 October 2013.
 Amayreh, Khalid (11 August 2003). "Arafat vs Abbas". Al-Ahram Weekly. Archived from the original on 11 August 2003. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 "Excerpts: Israeli security cabinet statement". BBC. 11 September 2003. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Crean, Ellen (29 September 2003). "New Palestinian Cabinet OK'd". cbsnews.com. Associated Press. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Shlaim, Avi; Tribune, International Herald (24 September 2003). "Opinion | Israel and Palestine : The real obstacle to peace is Sharon, not Arafat". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Crean, Ellen (15 September 2003). "Killing Arafat An Option". cbsnews.com. CBS. Associated Press. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 "Mid-East 'On Edge of Abyss': Arafat Aide". Sky News. 11 September 2003. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015.
 "Israel's SAS prepares to snatch Arafat". The Sunday Times. 14 September 2003. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Crean, Ellen (14 September 2003). "Arafat To Israel: Let's Talk Peace". cbsnews.com. Associated Press. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Hillman, G. Robert (19 September 2003). "Bush dismisses Arafat as Partner, Pushes for New Leader". The Dallas Morning News. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 21 July 2007.
 McDermott, Tricia (7 November 2003). "Arafat's Billions: One Man's Quest To Track Down Unaccounted-For Public Funds". cbsnews.com. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Alon, Gideon; Hass, Amira (14 August 2002). "MI chief: terror groups trying hard to pull off mega-attack". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. Retrieved 21 July 2007.
 "Arafat Diverted $900 Million to Private Account, IMF Says". Bloomberg News. 20 September 2003. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2013.
 For a general overview of the crucial importance of foreign funding in the peace process, and the PNA's use of such aid, see Rex Brynen, A Very Political Economy: Peacebuilding and Foreign Aid in the West Bank and Gaza, United States Institute of Peace Press, 2000
 "Backgrounder: Corruption in the PLO's Financial Empire".[permanent dead link]
 Katz, Yaakov (17 May 2006). "'Arafat used aid to buy weapons". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2007.
 "Documents seized during Operation Defensive Shield linking Arafat to Terrorism". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 15 April 2002. Archived from the original on 8 August 2004. Retrieved 13 July 2010.
 "Israel Claims Finding Evidence Against Arafat – 2002-04-03". VOA. 30 October 2009. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Bergman, Ronen (23 January 2018). "How Arafat Eluded Israel's Assassination Machine". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 January 2019.
 "Ending of Yasser's Life". Palestine: The Mystery Country. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.
 Biles, Peter (12 November 2004). "Arafat's funeral held in Cairo: Mystery illness". BBC News. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Melman, Yossi (14 July 2011). "What killed Yasser Arafat?". Haaretz. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Frail Arafat arrives in France". The Guardian. 29 October 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Lindgren, Jim (4 November 2004). "Arafat: If he is "brain-dead," he is dead". The Volokh Conspiracy. Agence France-Presse.
 "Hospitalization Report" (PDF). French Republic Ministry for Defence. 18 November 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Palestinians may exhume Yasser Arafat's body for tests". CBS News. 4 July 2012. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
 Erlanger, Steven; Altman, Lawrence K. (8 September 2005). "Medical records say Arafat died from a stroke". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Yasser Arafat medical records show health was blamed on gastroenteritis". The Daily Telegraph. London. 12 July 2012. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Laub, Karin (12 July 2012). "New Arafat medical file released in death probe". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 15 July 2012.
 Barzak, Ibrahim (11 November 2004). "Palestinians Mourn Death of Arafat". Chicago Tribune. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2017.
 Bennet, James (13 November 2004). "The Death of Arafat: An Emotion-Driven Flock Storms the Burial Ceremony". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Left, Sarah (11 November 2004). "Arafat begins final journey". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Bennet, James; Erlanger, Steven (11 November 2004). "Arafat Dies at 75; No Successor Set; West Bank Burial". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 December 2007.
 "Arafat's funeral: Who was there". BBC News. 12 November 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Israel Plans for Arafat Burial in Gaza". Associated Press. 7 November 2004. Archived from the original on 11 September 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2007.
 Chabin, Michele (8 November 2004). "Grave site for Arafat is another point of contention". USA Today. Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
 "No way to die". The Guardian. London. 15 December 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Arafat mausoleum opened by Abbas". BBC News. 10 November 2007. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Rubenstein, Danny (12 August 2007). "Arafat's doctor: There was HIV in his blood, but poison killed him". Haaretz. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Kapeliouk, Amnon (2 November 2005). "Yasser Arafat a-t-il été assassiné?" [Was Arafat murdered?]. Le Monde diplomatique (in French). Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Bannoura, Saed (20 July 2009). "Israeli Mossad poisoned Arafat through his medications, says Bassam Abu Sharif". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Arafat's aide: New information on president's death". Ma'an News Agency. 10 January 2011. Archived from the original on 21 September 2012.
 Israel Radio English news, 17 January 2011, 0430 UTC.
 "Cause of Arafat death 'unknown' Medical records of former Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat appear to show that doctors could not determine the underlying cause of his death". BBC News. 8 September 2005. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 McDermott, Rose (2008). Presidential leadership, illness, and decision making. Cambridge University Press. p. 244. ISBN 978-0-521-88272-9.
 "Arafat's Widow Alleges 'Criminal Scheme' over Death". CBN.com. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2012.
 "Palestinians head to Paris to probe Arafat's death". The Irish Times. 17 November 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Family: Platelet disorder killed Arafat". Ma'an News Agency. 11 October 2011. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 4 July 2012.
 Carlstrom, Gregg (4 July 2012). "Arafat's widow calls for body to be exhumed". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 "Arafat's doctor wants autopsy". NBC News. Associated Press. 12 November 2004. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Yasser Arafat: Palestinians call for poison inquiry". BBC News. 3 July 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Froidevaux, P.; Baechler, S.; Bailat, C. J.; Castella, V.; Augsburger, M.; Michaud, K.; Mangin, P.; Bochud, F. O. (2013). "Improving forensic investigation for polonium poisoning". Lancet. 382 (9900): 1308. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61834-6. ISSN 0140-6736. PMID 24120205. S2CID 32134286. Retrieved 12 October 2013. (Subscription required.)
 Lema, Luis (24 May 2014). "Yasser Arafat, la valse des isotopes". Le Temps (in French). p. 3. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Carlstrom, Gregg (27 November 2013). "Yasser Arafat's body exhumed in Ramallah". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Yasser Arafat's remains exhumed for death investigation, Palestinians say". CBS. 27 November 2012. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012. Retrieved 14 November 2013.
 Abdalla, Jihan (27 November 2012). "Samples taken from Arafat corpse for poison tests". Reuters. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Swiss Team: Arafat Poisoned to Death With Polonium". Haaretz. Reuters. 6 November 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
 Poort, David (8 November 2013). "Q&A: Francois Bochud on the Arafat report". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Taylor, Paul (7 November 2013). "Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat was murdered with polonium: widow". NBC News. Reuters. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Isachenkov, Vladimir (26 December 2013). "Russia: Arafat's death not caused by radiation". The Washington Times. Associated Press. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 "Arafat was not poisoned, French prosecutor says". The Jerusalem Post. 17 March 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
 Taylor, Paul (3 December 2013). "Arafat did not die of poisoning, French tests conclude". Reuters. Retrieved 17 June 2024.
Further reading
External videos
video icon Booknotes interview with John and Janet Wallach on Arafat: In the Eyes of the Beholder, 23 December 1990, C-SPAN
Aburish, Said K. (1998). Arafat: From Defender to Dictator. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-58234-049-4.
Gowers, Andrew; Tony Walker (2005). Arafat: The Biography. Virgin Books. ISBN 978-1-85227-924-0.
Hart, Alan (1989). Arafat, a political biography. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-32711-6.
Karsh, Efraim (2003). Arafat's War: The Man and His Battle for Israeli Conquest. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-1758-8.
Livingstone, Neil (1990). Inside the PLO. Reader's Digest Association. ISBN 978-0-7090-4548-9.
Rubin, Barry M.; Judith Colp Rubin (2003). Yasir Arafat: A Political Biography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516689-7.
Rubenstein, Danny; Leon, Dan (1995). The Mystery of Arafat. Steerforth Press. ISBN 978-1-883642-10-5.
Sela, Avraham (2002). "Arafat, Yasser". In Avraham, Sela (ed.). The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East (Rev. and updated ed.). New York: Continuum. pp. 166–171. ISBN 9780826414137. OCLC 48706504.
Wallach, Janet; John Wallach (1990). Arafat: In the Eyes of the Beholder. Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart. ISBN 978-0-8184-0533-4. OCLC 21950960.
External links
Yasser Arafat
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Data from Wikidata
Yasser Arafat on Nobelprize.org Edit this at Wikidata
Yasser Arafat (1929–2004) at PASSIA
"A Life in Retrospect: Yasser Arafat", Time
Appearances on C-SPAN
Yasser Arafat at IMDb
Yasser Arafat collected news and commentary at The Jerusalem Post
Yasser Arafat collected news and commentary at The New York Times
vte
Fatah and their splinter groups
vte
Arab–Israeli conflict
vte
Presidents of the Palestinian National Authority
vte
Chairmen of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization
vte
Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize
vte
1994 Nobel Prize laureates
vte
Laureates of the Prince or Princess of Asturias Award for International Cooperation
vte
Time Persons of the Year
vte
Arab nationalism
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Yasser Arafat1929 births2004 deaths20th-century Palestinian politicians20th-century presidents in Asia21st-century Palestinian politiciansCairo University alumniCentral Committee of Fatah membersCollars of the Order of the White LionFatah military commandersMembers of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation OrganizationMuslim socialistsNobel Peace Prize laureatesPalestine Liberation Organization membersPalestine Liberation OrganizationPalestinian Arab nationalistsPalestinian billionairesPalestinian civil engineersPalestinian MuslimsPalestinian nationalistsPalestinian Nobel laureatesPalestinian people imprisoned by SyriaPalestinian people of Egyptian descentPalestinian revolutionariesPeople of the Israeli–Palestinian conflictPeople of the Lebanese Civil WarPoliticians from CairoPresidents of PalestinePresidents of the Palestinian National AuthorityRecipients of the Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise, 1st classSri Lanka Mitra VibhushanaSurvivors of aviation accidents or incidents20th-century engineersPeople of the Second Intifada
This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 19:50 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Yasser Arafat

118 languages
Add topic



WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Early history

Timeline of early development
Early commercial instruments
Sound-powered telephones

Principle of operation
Applications
Digital telephones and voice over IP
Cordless telephones

Base station
Mobile phones

Smartphones
Mobile phone usage
Satellite phones
See also
References
Further reading
External links
Telephone

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Phone" redirects here. For cell phones, see Mobile phone. For the handheld personal computer, see Smartphone. For other uses, see Phone (disambiguation) and Telephone (disambiguation).

An old rotary dial telephone

AT&T push button telephone made by Western Electric, model 2500 DMG black, 1980
A telephone, colloquially referred to as a phone, is a telecommunications device that enables two or more users to conduct a conversation when they are too far apart to be easily heard directly. A telephone converts sound, typically and most efficiently the human voice, into electronic signals that are transmitted via cables and other communication channels to another telephone which reproduces the sound to the receiving user. The term is derived from Ancient Greek: τῆλε, romanized: tēle, lit. 'far' and φωνή (phōnē, voice), together meaning distant voice.[1]

In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell was the first to be granted a United States patent for a device that produced clearly intelligible replication of the human voice at a second device.[2] This instrument was further developed by many others, and became rapidly indispensable in business, government, and in households.

The essential elements of a telephone are a microphone (transmitter) to speak into and an earphone (receiver) which reproduces the voice at a distant location.[3] The receiver and transmitter are usually built into a handset which is held up to the ear and mouth during conversation. The transmitter converts the sound waves to electrical signals which are sent through the telecommunications system to the receiving telephone, which converts the signals into audible sound in the receiver or sometimes a loudspeaker. Telephones permit transmission in both directions simultaneously.

Most telephones also contain an alerting feature, such as a ringer or a visual indicator, to announce an incoming telephone call. Telephone calls are initiated most commonly with a keypad or dial, affixed to the telephone, to enter a telephone number, which is the address of the call recipient's telephone in the telecommunications system, but other methods existed in the early history of the telephone.

The first telephones were directly connected to each other from one customer's office or residence to another customer's location. Being impractical beyond just a few customers, these systems were quickly replaced by manually operated centrally located switchboards. These exchanges were soon connected together, eventually forming an automated, worldwide public switched telephone network. For greater mobility, various radio systems were developed in the mid-20th century for transmission between mobile stations on ships and in automobiles.

Handheld mobile phones were introduced for personal service starting in 1973. In later decades, the analog cellular system evolved into digital networks with greater capability and lower cost. Convergence in communication services has provided a broad spectrum of capabilities in cell phones, including mobile computing, giving rise to the smartphone, the dominant type of telephone in the world today.

Modern telephones exist in various forms and are implemented through different systems, including fixed-line, cellular, satellite, and Internet-based devices, all of which are integrated into the public switched telephone network (PSTN). This interconnected system allows any telephone, regardless of its underlying technology or geographic location, to reach another through a unique telephone number. While mobile and landline services are fully integrated into the global telecommunication network, some Internet-based services, such as VoIP, may not always be directly connected to the PSTN, though they still allow communication across different systems when a connection is made.

Early history
Main article: History of the telephone
Further information: Invention of the telephone and Elisha Gray and Alexander Bell telephone controversy

Alexander Graham Bell's Telephone Patent Drawing

Replica of the telettrofono at Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci of Milan, Italy, invented by Antonio Meucci and credited by several sources as the first telephone.[4]

Bell placing the first New York to Chicago telephone call in 1892
Before the development of the electric telephone, the term telephone was applied to other inventions, and not all early researchers of the electrical device used the term. Perhaps the earliest use of the word for a communications system was the telephon created by Gottfried Huth in 1796. Huth proposed an alternative to the optical telegraph of Claude Chappe in which the operators in the signaling towers would shout to each other by means of what he called "speaking tubes", but would now be called giant megaphones.[5] A communication device for sailing vessels, called telephone, was invented by Captain John Taylor in 1844. This instrument used four air horns to communicate with vessels in foggy weather.[6][7]

Johann Philipp Reis used the term in reference to his invention, commonly known as the Reis telephone, in c. 1860. His device appears to be the first device based on the conversion of sound into electrical impulses.

The term telephone was adopted into the vocabulary of many languages. It is derived from the Greek: τῆλε, tēle, "far" and φωνή, phōnē, "voice", together meaning "distant voice".

Credit for the invention of the electric telephone is frequently disputed. As with other influential inventions such as radio, television, the light bulb, and the computer, several inventors pioneered experimental work on voice transmission over a wire and improved on each other's ideas. New controversies over the issue still arise from time to time. Charles Bourseul, Antonio Meucci, Johann Philipp Reis, Alexander Graham Bell, and Elisha Gray, amongst others, have all been credited with the invention of the telephone.[8][9]

Alexander Graham Bell was the first to be awarded a patent for the electric telephone by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) in March 1876.[10] Before Bell's patent, the telephone transmitted sound in a way that was similar to the telegraph. This method used vibrations and circuits to send electrical pulses, but was missing key features. Bell found that this method produced a sound through intermittent currents, but in order for the telephone to work, a fluctuating current reproduced sounds the best. The fluctuating currents became the basis for the working telephone, creating Bell's patent.[11] That first patent by Bell was the master patent of the telephone, from which other patents for electric telephone devices and features flowed.[12]

In 1876, shortly after Bell's patent application, Hungarian engineer Tivadar Puskás proposed the telephone switch, which allowed for the formation of telephone exchanges, and eventually networks.[13]

In the United Kingdom, the blower is used as a slang term for a telephone. The term came from navy slang for a speaking tube.[14] In the U.S., a somewhat dated slang term refers to the telephone as "the horn," as in "I couldn't get him on the horn," or "I'll be off the horn in a moment."[15]

Timeline of early development
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the telephone.

Reis's telephone around 1861, first device called telephone[16]

Bell's first telephone transmitter, ca. 1876, reenacted 50 years later

Acoustic telephone ad, The Consolidated Telephone Co., Jersey City, New Jersey, 1886

1896 telephone from Sweden

Wooden wall telephone with a hand-cranked magneto generator
1844: Innocenzo Manzetti first mooted the idea of a "speaking telegraph" or telephone. Use of the "speaking telegraph" and "sound telegraph" monikers would eventually be replaced by the newer, distinct name, "telephone".
26 August 1854: Charles Bourseul published an article in the magazine L'Illustration (Paris): "Transmission électrique de la parole" (electric transmission of speech), describing a "make-and-break" type telephone transmitter later created by Johann Reis.
26 October 1861: Johann Philipp Reis (1834–1874) publicly demonstrated the Reis telephone before the Physical Society of Frankfurt.[9] It was the first device to transmit a voice via electronic signals and for that the first modern telephone.[17][18] Reis also coined the term.[19] He used his telephone to transmit the phrase "Das Pferd frisst keinen Gurkensalat" ("The horse does not eat cucumber salad").
22 August 1865, La Feuille d'Aoste reported "It is rumored that English technicians to whom Manzetti illustrated his method for transmitting spoken words on the telegraph wire intend to apply said invention in England on several private telegraph lines".[citation needed] However, telephones would not be demonstrated there until 1876, with a set of telephones from Bell.
28 December 1871: Antonio Meucci files patent caveat No. 3335 in the U.S. Patent Office, titled "Sound Telegraph", describing communication of voice between two people by wire. A patent caveat was not an invention patent award, but only an unverified notice filed by an individual that he or she intends to file a patent application in the future.
1874: Meucci, after having renewed the caveat for two years does not renew it again, and the caveat lapses.
6 April 1875: Bell's U.S. Patent 161,739 "Transmitters and Receivers for Electric Telegraphs" is granted. This uses multiple vibrating steel reeds in make-break circuits.
11 February 1876: Elisha Gray invents a liquid transmitter for use with the telephone but does not build one.
14 February 1876: Gray files a patent caveat for transmitting the human voice through a telegraphic circuit.
14 February 1876: Alexander Graham Bell applies for the patent "Improvements in Telegraphy", for electromagnetic telephones using what is now called amplitude modulation (oscillating current and voltage) but which he referred to as "undulating current".
19 February 1876: Gray is notified by the U.S. Patent Office of an interference between his caveat and Bell's patent application. Gray decides to abandon his caveat.
7 March 1876: Bell's U.S. patent 174,465 "Improvement in Telegraphy" is granted, covering "the method of, and apparatus for, transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically…by causing electrical undulations, similar in form to the vibrations of the air accompanying the said vocal or other sound."
10 March 1876: The first successful telephone transmission of clear speech using a liquid transmitter when Bell spoke into his device, "Mr. Watson, come here, I want to see you." and Watson heard each word distinctly.
30 January 1877: Bell's U.S. patent 186,787 is granted for an electromagnetic telephone using permanent magnets, iron diaphragms, and a call bell.
27 April 1877: Thomas Edison files a patent application for a carbon (graphite) transmitter. It was published as No. 474,230 on 3 May 1892, after a 15-year delay because of litigation. Edison was granted patent 222,390 for a carbon granules transmitter in 1879.
Early commercial instruments
Early telephones were technically diverse. Some used a water microphone, some had a metal diaphragm that induced current in an electromagnet wound around a permanent magnet, and some were dynamic – their diaphragm vibrated a coil of wire in the field of a permanent magnet or the coil vibrated the diaphragm. The sound-powered dynamic variants survived in small numbers through the 20th century in military and maritime applications, where its ability to create its own electrical power was crucial. Most, however, used the Edison/Berliner carbon transmitter, which was much louder than the other kinds, even though it required an induction coil which was an impedance matching transformer to make it compatible with the impedance of the line. The Edison patents kept the Bell monopoly viable into the 20th century, by which time the network was more important than the instrument.

Early telephones were locally powered, using either a dynamic transmitter or by the powering of a transmitter with a local battery. One of the jobs of outside plant personnel was to visit each telephone periodically to inspect the battery. During the 20th century, telephones powered from the telephone exchange over the same wires that carried the voice signals became common.

Early telephones used a single wire for the subscriber's line, with ground return used to complete the circuit (as used in telegraphs). The earliest dynamic telephones also had only one port opening for sound, with the user alternately listening and speaking (or rather, shouting) into the same hole. Sometimes the instruments were operated in pairs at each end, making conversation more convenient but also more expensive.

At first, the benefits of a telephone exchange were not exploited. Instead, telephones were leased in pairs to a subscriber, who had to arrange for a telegraph contractor to construct a line between them, for example, between a home and a shop. Users who wanted the ability to speak to several different locations would need to obtain and set up three or four pairs of telephones. Western Union, already using telegraph exchanges, quickly extended the principle to its telephones in New York City and San Francisco, and Bell was not slow in appreciating the potential.

Signalling began in an appropriately primitive manner. The user alerted the other end, or the exchange operator, by whistling into the transmitter. Exchange operation soon resulted in telephones being equipped with a bell in a ringer box, first operated over a second wire, and later over the same wire, but with a condenser (capacitor) in series with the bell coil to allow the AC ringer signal through while still blocking DC (keeping the phone "on hook"). Telephones connected to the earliest Strowger switch automatic exchanges had seven wires, one for the knife switch, one for each telegraph key, one for the bell, one for the push-button and two for speaking. Large wall telephones in the early 20th century usually incorporated the bell, and separate bell boxes for desk phones dwindled away in the middle of the century.

Rural and other telephones that were not on a common battery exchange had a magneto hand-cranked generator to produce a high voltage alternating signal to ring the bells of other telephones on the line and to alert the operator. Some local farming communities that were not connected to the main networks set up barbed wire telephone lines that exploited the existing system of field fences to transmit the signal.

In the 1890s a new smaller style of telephone was introduced, packaged in three parts. The transmitter stood on a stand, known as a "candlestick" for its shape. When not in use, the receiver hung on a hook with a switch in it, known as a "switchhook". Previous telephones required the user to operate a separate switch to connect either the voice or the bell. With the new kind, the user was less likely to leave the phone "off the hook". In phones connected to magneto exchanges, the bell, induction coil, battery and magneto were in a separate bell box or "ringer box".[20] In phones connected to common battery exchanges, the ringer box was installed under a desk, or other out-of-the-way place, since it did not need a battery or magneto.

Cradle designs were also used at this time, having a handle with the receiver and transmitter attached, now called a handset, separate from the cradle base that housed the magneto crank and other parts. They were larger than the "candlestick" and more popular.

Disadvantages of single-wire operation such as crosstalk and hum from nearby AC power wires had already led to the use of twisted pairs and, for long-distance telephones, four-wire circuits. Users at the beginning of the 20th century did not place long-distance calls from their own telephones but made an appointment and were connected with the assistance of a telephone operator.[21]

What turned out to be the most popular and longest-lasting physical style of telephone was introduced in the early 20th century, including Bell's 202-type desk set. A carbon granule transmitter and electromagnetic receiver were united in a single molded plastic handle, which when not in use was secured in a cradle in the base unit. The circuit diagram of the model 202 shows the direct connection of the transmitter to the line, while the receiver was inductively coupled. In local battery configurations, when the local loop was too long to provide sufficient current from the exchange, the transmitter was powered by a local battery and inductively coupled, while the receiver was included in the local loop.[22] The coupling transformer and the ringer were mounted in a separate enclosure, called the subscriber set. The dial switch in the base interrupted the line current by repeatedly but very briefly disconnecting the line one to ten times for each digit, and the hook switch (in the center of the circuit diagram) disconnected the line and the transmitter battery while the handset was on the cradle.

In the 1930s, telephone sets were developed that combined the bell and induction coil with the desk set, obviating a separate ringer box. The rotary dial becoming commonplace in the 1930s in many areas enabled customer-dialed service, but some magneto systems remained even into the 1960s. The village of Bryant Pond, Maine is believed to be the last telephone exchange in the U.S. to convert from magneto to direct-dial service on October 11, 1983.[23] After World War II, the telephone networks saw rapid expansion and more efficient telephone sets, such as the model 500 telephone in the United States, were developed that permitted larger local networks centered around central offices. A breakthrough new technology was the introduction of Touch-Tone signaling using push-button telephones by American Telephone & Telegraph Company (AT&T) in 1963.[24]

Ericsson DBH 1001 (ca. 1931), the first combined telephone made with a Bakelite housing and handset.
Ericsson DBH 1001 (ca. 1931), the first combined telephone made with a Bakelite housing and handset.
 
Telephone used by American soldiers (WWII, Minalin, Pampanga, Philippines)
Telephone used by American soldiers (WWII, Minalin, Pampanga, Philippines)
 
Duration: 12 seconds.0:12
Video shows the operation of an Ericofon
 
One type of mobile phone, called a cell phone
One type of mobile phone, called a cell phone
Sound-powered telephones

Modern emergency telephone powered by sound alone
Main article: Sound-powered telephone
A sound-powered telephone is a telephone which transmits voice communication by wire, powered by the energy of the sound waves of the operator speaking.

Principle of operation
A moving-coil microphone converts the sound waves into an electrical signal, which is then converted back into sound waves at the receiver's end. Similar to early regular landline telephones, operators of sound-powered telephones generally alert the receiver of a call using a hand-cranked generator (magneto), which generates an electrical current which activates a buzzer at the receiver's end, sometimes known as a howler or growler. Some telephone systems can use external electrical power to operate ringers or amplifiers, but will revert to sound-powered communications in the event of failure of the external power supply.[25] Stations are usually connected via twisted pair wires to reduce electrical interference, and can be positioned at considerable distances from each other in the order of several kilometers. Using 1mm core diameter twisted-pair wiring, some sound-powered telephone systems can operate a pair of handsets positioned up to 48 km (30 miles) apart.[26]

Applications

A U.S. Navy petty officer uses a sound-powered telephone during a general quarters drill.
Because sound-powered telephones do not require external electrical power, they are used where reliable communications are vital even in event of loss of power. They are often used for communications in airports, railways and public utilities, mining, ski slopes, bridges, sporting arenas and shipyards. Because they operate at low voltages, they are suitable for use in situations where there is a risk of explosions or fire, such as chemical plants, oil and gas works, arsenals, mines and quarries.[27] They are frequently used aboard ships, especially naval vessels, and in land military communications.

Aboard naval vessels, sound-powered telephones generally have auxiliary wiring circuits routed through the ship, to reduce the likelihood that all circuits will be rendered inoperable by battle damage.[28]

Digital telephones and voice over IP
Main articles: Digital telephony and Voice over IP

An IP desktop telephone attached to a computer network

Fixed telephone lines per 100 inhabitants 1997–2007
The invention of the transistor in 1947 dramatically changed the technology used in telephone systems and in the long-distance transmission networks, over the next several decades. With the development of stored program control and MOS integrated circuits for electronic switching systems, and new transmission technologies such as pulse-code modulation (PCM), telephony gradually evolved towards digital telephony, which improved the capacity, quality, and cost of the network.[29]

Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) was launched in the 1980's, providing businesses and consumers with access to digital telephony services such as data, voice, video, and fax services.[30]

The development of digital data communications methods made it possible to digitize voice and transmit it as real-time data across computer networks and the Internet, giving rise to the field of Internet Protocol (IP) telephony, also known as voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). VoIP has proven to be a disruptive technology that is rapidly replacing traditional telephone network infrastructure.[31]

By January 2005, up to 10% of telephone subscribers in Japan and South Korea had switched to this digital telephone service. A January 2005 Newsweek article suggested that Internet telephony may be "the next big thing."[32] The technology has spawned a new industry comprising many VoIP companies that offer services to consumers and businesses. The reported global VoIP market in October 2021 was $85.2 billion with a projection of $102.5 billion by 2026.[33]

IP telephony uses high-bandwidth Internet connections and specialized customer premises equipment to transmit telephone calls via the Internet, or any modern private data network. The customer equipment may be an analog telephone adapter (ATA) which translates the signals of a conventional analog telephone; an IP Phone, a dedicated standalone device; or a computer softphone application, utilizing the microphone and headset devices of a personal computer or smartphone.[34]

In recent years, VoIP technology has evolved to integrate with mobile networks, including Voice over LTE (VoLTE) and Voice over 5G (Vo5G), enabling seamless voice communication over mobile data networks. These advancements have made VoIP not only a primary method for Internet-based communication but also a central feature of modern mobile communication infrastructure.[35]

While traditional analog telephones are typically powered from the central office through the telephone line, digital telephones require a local power supply.[36] Internet-based digital service also requires special provisions to provide the service location to the emergency services when an emergency telephone number is called.[37]

Cordless telephones
Main article: Cordless telephone

A cordless telephone system consisting of a handset resting on a base station (left) and a second handset resting on a battery charger unit (right)
A cordless telephone or portable telephone consists of a base station unit and one or more portable cordless handsets. The base station connects to a telephone line, or provides service by voice over IP (VOIP). The handset communicates with the base station via radio frequency signals. A handset's operational range is limited, usually to within the same building or within a short distance from the base station.

Base station
Base stations include a radio transceiver which enables full-duplex, outgoing and incoming signals and speech with the handsets. The base station often includes a microphone, audio amplifier, and a loudspeaker to enable hands-free speakerphone conversations, without needing to use a handset. The base station may also have a numeric keypad for dialing, and a display for caller ID. In addition, answering machine function may be built in.[38]

The cordless handset contains a rechargeable battery, which the base station recharges when the handset rests in its cradle. Muilt-handset systems generally also have additional charging stands. A cordless telephone typically requires a constant electricity supply to power the base station and charger units by means of a DC transformer which plugs into a wall AC power outlet.[38]

Mobile phones
Main article: Mobile phone

Two decades of evolution of mobile phones, from a 1992 Motorola 8900X-2 to the 2014 iPhone 6 Plus

A typical SIM card (mini-SIM with a cutout to convert the card to micro-SIM size)

An SMS message written on a Motorola RAZR V3
A mobile phone or cellphone or hand phone is a handheld telephone which connects via radio transmissions to a cellular telephone network. The cellular network consists of a network of ground based transmitter/receiver stations with antennas – which are usually located on towers or on buildings – and infrastructure connecting to the global telecommunications network.[39] Analog cellular networks first appeared in 1979, followed by the introduction of digital cellular networks in the early 1990s, marking the beginning of the GSM standard.[40] Over time, these networks evolved, with each new generation (2G, 3G, 4G, and beyond) offering improved data transmission capabilities and more advanced features for mobile communication.

Mobile phones require a SIM card to be inserted into the phone. The SIM card is a small PVC card containing a small integrated circuit which stores the user's international mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) number and its related key, which are used to identify and authenticate subscribers to the cellular network.

Mobile phones generally incorporate an LCD or OLED display, with some types, such as smartphones, having touch screens. Since the 1990s, mobile phones have gained other features which are not directly related to their primary function as telephones. These include text messaging, calendars, alarm clocks, personal schedulers, cameras, music players, games and later, internet access and smartphone functionality. Nearly all mobile phones have the ability to send text messages to other users via the SMS (Short Message Service) protocol. The multimedia messaging service (MMS) protocol enables users to send and receive multimedia content, such as photos, audio files and video files. As their functionality has increased over the years, many types of mobile phone, notably smartphones, require an operating system to run. Popular mobile phone operating systems in the past have included Symbian, Palm OS, BlackBerry OS and mobile phone versions of Windows. As of 2022, the most used operating systems are Google's Android and Apple's iOS.[41][42]

Before the era of smartphones, mobile phones were generally manufactured by companies specializing in telecommunications equipment, such as Nokia, Motorola, and Ericsson. Since the advent of smartphones, mobile phone manufacturers have also included consumer electronics companies, such as Apple, Samsung and Xiaomi.[42]

Smartphones
Main article: Smartphone

A smartphone with a touchscreen user interface, held in landscape orientation
As of 2022, most mobile phones are smartphones, being a combination of a mobile phone and a personal computing device in the same unit. Most smartphones are primarily operated using a graphical user interface and a touch screen. Many phones have a secondary voice user interface, such as Siri on Apple iPhones, which can operate many of the device's functions, as well as enabling users to use spoken commands to interact with the internet. Typically alphanumeric text input is accomplished via an on-screen virtual keyboard, although some smartphones have a small physical keyboard. Smartphones offer the ability to access internet data through the cellular network and via wi-fi, and usually allow direct connectivity to other devices via Bluetooth or a wired interface, such as USB or Lightning connectors.

Smartphones, being able to run apps, have vastly expanded functionality compared to previous mobile phones. Having internet access and built in cameras, smartphones have made video calling readily accessible via IP connections. Smartphones also have access to a large number of web services and web apps, giving them functionality similar to traditional computers, although smartphones are often limited by their relatively small screen size and the size of their keyboards. Typically, smartphones feature such tools as cameras, media players, web browsers, email clients, interactive maps, satellite navigation and a variety of sensors, such as a compass, accelerometers and GPS receivers. In addition to voice calls, smartphone users commonly communicate using a wide variety of messaging formats, including SMS, MMS, email, and various proprietary messaging services, such as iMessage and various social media platforms.

Mobile phone usage
In 2002, only 10% of the world's population used mobile phones and by 2005 that percentage had risen to 46%.[43] By the end of 2009, there were a total of nearly 6 billion mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers worldwide. This included 1.26 billion fixed-line subscribers and 4.6 billion mobile subscribers.[44]

Satellite phones
Main article: Satellite phone

First generation late 1990s Iridium satellite phone
A satellite telephone, or satphone, is a type of mobile phone that connects to other phones or the telephone network by radio link through satellites orbiting the Earth instead of terrestrial cell sites, as cellphones do. Therefore, they can work in most geographic locations on the Earth's surface, as long as open sky and the line-of-sight between the phone and the satellite is provided. Depending on the architecture of a particular system, coverage may include the entire Earth or only specific regions. Satellite phones provide similar functionality to terrestrial mobile telephones; voice calling, text messaging, and low-bandwidth Internet access are supported through most systems. The advantage of a satellite phone is that it can be used in such regions where local terrestrial communication infrastructures, such as landline and cellular networks, are not available.

Satellite phones are popular on expeditions into remote locations, hunting, fishing, maritime sector, humanitarian missions, business trips, and mining in hard-to-reach areas, where there is no reliable cellular service.[45] Satellite telephones rarely get disrupted by natural disasters on Earth or human actions such as war, so they have proven to be dependable communication tools in emergency situations, when the local communications system can be compromised.[46]

See also
telephone icon	Telephones portal
Bell System
Bell Telephone Memorial
Cellular network
Cordless telephone
Harvard sentences
Index of telephone-related articles
Jipp curve
List of telephone operating companies
Mobile operating system
Multimedia messaging service (MMS)
Party line (telephony)
Phone hacking
Radiotelephone
Satellite phone
SIM card
Spamming
Telephone keypad
Telephone jack and plug
Telephone tapping
Tip and ring
Videophone
References
 "Etymology of the word "phone"". Archived from the original on 2020-10-27. Retrieved 2020-10-15.
 "Who Is Credited With Inventing the Telephone". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 2020-10-18. Retrieved 2020-10-14.
 "United States Coast Guard Sound-Powered Telephone Talkers Manual, 1979, p. 1" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-05-14. Retrieved 2018-05-13.
 Carroll, Rory (June 17, 2002). "Bell did not invent telephone, US rules". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 31, 2018. Retrieved August 24, 2018 – via www.theguardian.com.
 Holzmann, Gerard J.; Pehrson, Björn, The Early History of Data Networks, pp. 90-91, Wiley, 1995 ISBN 0818667826.
 The Year-book of Facts in Science and Art. Simpkin, Marshall, and Company. July 6, 1845. p. 55 – via Internet Archive.
 "The Telephone and Telephone Exchanges" by J. E. Kingsbury published in 1915.
 Coe, Lewis (1995). The Telephone and Its Several Inventors: A History. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, Inc. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-7864-2609-6.
 Kempe, Harry Robert; Garcke, Emile (1911). "Telephone" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 547–57.
 Brown, Travis (1994). Historical first patents: the first United States patent for many everyday things (illustrated ed.). University of Michigan: Scarecrow Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-8108-2898-8.
 Beauchamp, Christopher (2010). "Who Invented the Telephone?: Lawyers, Patents, and the Judgments of History". Technology and Culture. 39: 858–859 – via Project MUSE.
 US 174465 Alexander Graham Bell: "Improvement in Telegraphy" filed on February 14, 1876, granted on March 7, 1876.
 "Puskás, Tivadar". Omikk.bme.hu. Archived from the original on 2017-10-18. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 Rick Jolly (2018). Jackspeak: A guide to British Naval slang & usage. Bloomsbury. p. 46. ISBN 9781472834140.
 "on the horn". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 25 August 2021.
 "Ueber Telephonie durch den galvanischen Strom. In: Jahres-Bericht des physikalischen Vereins zu Frankfurt am Main für das Rechnungsjahr 1860-1861, pp. 57-64 by Johann Philipp REIS on Milestones of Science Books". Archived from the original on 2024-01-14. Retrieved 2024-01-14.
 Coe, Lewis (2006). The Telephone and Its Several Inventors: A History. McFarland. pp. 16–24. ISBN 9780786426096.
 Turner, Gerard L'Estrange; Weston, Margaret (1983). Nineteenth-century Scientific Instruments. University of California Press. p. 140. ISBN 9780520051607.
 "Ueber Telephonie durch den galvanischen Strom. In: Jahres-Bericht des physikalischen Vereins zu Frankfurt am Main für das Rechnungsjahr 1860-1861, pp. 57-64 by Johann Philipp REIS on Milestones of Science Books". Archived from the original on 2024-01-14. Retrieved 2024-01-14.
 "Ringer Boxes". Telephonymuseum.com. Archived from the original on 2001-10-12. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 DiPirro, Peggy. "The beginning of long distance telephone service". The Palm Beach Post. Archived from the original on 2023-03-06. Retrieved 2022-08-25.
 Circuit Diagram, Model 102[usurped], Porticus Telephone website.
 "End of an era for Maine crank phones". www.upi.com/Archives/1983/10/10/End-of-an-era-for-Maine-crank-phones/4303434606400/. Retrieved March 9, 2025.
 "Tone dialing telephones are introduced, November 18, 1963". EDN. 18 November 2019. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2022.
 "Products: Civil Vessels Telephone: Sound Powered Telephone". NavElec. NavElec consortium. Archived from the original on 23 April 2024. Retrieved 10 December 2024.
 "Sound Powered Telephone: Frequently Asked Questions". Sound Powered Telephone. Dynalec Corporation. 2011. Archived from the original on 2024-12-10. Retrieved 10 December 2024.
 "How do sound powered telephones work?". Sound Powered Telephone. Dynalec Corporation. 2011. Archived from the original on 2024-05-19. Retrieved 10 December 2024.
 Cutler, Thomas J. (February 2021). "The Reliability of Sound-Powered Phone Systems". U.S. Naval Institute. Archived from the original on 2024-12-10. Retrieved 10 December 2024.
 Allstot, David J. (2016). "Switched Capacitor Filters". In Maloberti, Franco; Davies, Anthony C. (eds.). A Short History of Circuits and Systems: From Green, Mobile, Pervasive Networking to Big Data Computing (PDF). IEEE Circuits and Systems Society. pp. 105–110. ISBN 9788793609860. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-09-30. Retrieved 2019-11-29.
 "What is ISDN - Essentials Guide » Electronics Notes". www.electronics-notes.com. Archived from the original on 2022-08-28. Retrieved 2022-08-28.
 "VoIP is winning over a variety of phone users". Orlando Sentinel. 18 September 2006. Archived from the original on 2022-08-30. Retrieved 2022-08-25.
 Sheridan, Barrett. "Newsweek – National News, World News, Health, Technology, Entertainment and more..." MSNBC. Archived from the original on January 18, 2005. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 "Global VoIP Services Market 2021-2026". Research and Markets. October 2021. Archived from the original on 2021-12-04. Retrieved 2021-12-04.
 "VoIP Equipment Guide 2022: Types of Hardware + Top Manufacturers". getvoip.com. Retrieved 2022-08-25.
 "Communication services (VoLTE/VoNR)". www.3gpp.org. Archived from the original on 2024-12-02. Retrieved 2024-11-30.
 "VoIP Phone System Battery Backups | voipreview.org". VoipReview. 2011-09-15. Archived from the original on 2022-08-08. Retrieved 2022-08-25.
 "VoIP and 911 Service". Federal Communications Commission. 2011-05-26. Archived from the original on 2022-08-11. Retrieved 2022-08-25.
 Freudenrich, Craig (2000-12-11). "How Cordless Telephones Work". HowStuffWorks. InfoSpace Holdings. Archived from the original on 2022-08-08. Retrieved 2022-08-07.
 Walters, Lourens O; Kritzinger, PS (December 2000). "Cellular Networks: Past, Present, and Future". XRDS: Crossroads, the ACM Magazine for Students. 7 (2). Association for Computing Machinery: 4–ff35. doi:10.1145/355146.355149. Archived from the original on 2022-11-05. Retrieved 2022-10-31.
 Galazzo, Richard (2022-01-24). "From 1G to 5G: The History of Cell Phones and their Cellular Generations". CENGN. Archived from the original on 2022-10-05. Retrieved 2022-10-07.
 "Smartphones Market - Growth, Trends, COVID-19 Impact, and Forecasts (2022 - 2027)". Mordor Intelligence. 2022. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2022.
 Wankhede, Calvin. "The history of cell phones: A decade-by-decade timeline". Android Authority. Authority Media. Archived from the original on 2024-09-16. Retrieved 16 September 2024.
 "Are Cell Phones Ruining Our Social Skills? – SiOWfa15: Science in Our World: Certainty and Controversy". sites.psu.edu. Archived from the original on 2017-11-20. Retrieved 2017-11-16.
 Next-Generation Networks Set to Transform Communications, Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine International Telecommunication Union website, 4 September 2007. Retrieved 5 July 2009.
 ruge.axessnet (2018-08-28). "Satellite phone: know the 5 sectors that use them the most". axessnet. Archived from the original on 2023-01-13. Retrieved 2023-01-13.
 "Everything That You Need to Know About a Satellite Phone". Satellite Phone Review. Archived from the original on 2023-01-12. Retrieved 2023-01-12.
Further reading
Brooks, John (1976). Telephone: The first hundred years. HarperCollins.
Bruce, Robert V. (1990). Bell: Alexander Graham Bell and the Conquest of Solitude. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-9691-2.
Casson, Herbert Newton. (1910) The history of the telephone online.
Coe, Lewis (1995). The Telephone and Its Several Inventors: A History. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co.
Evenson, A. Edward (2000). The Telephone Patent Conspiracy of 1876: The Elisha Gray – Alexander Bell Controversy. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co.
Fischer, Claude S. (1994) America calling: A social history of the telephone to 1940 (Univ of California Press, 1994)
Huurdeman, Anton A. (2003). The Worldwide History of Telecommunications Hoboken: NJ: Wiley-IEEE Press.
John, Richard R. (2010). Network Nation: Inventing American Telecommunications. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
MacDougall, Robert. The People's Network: The Political Economy of the Telephone in the Gilded Age. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Mueller, Milton. (1993) "Universal service in telephone history: A reconstruction." Telecommunications Policy 17.5 (1993): 352–69.
Todd, Kenneth P. (1998), A Capsule History of the Bell System[usurped]. American Telephone & Telegraph Company (AT&T).
External links

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Telephone.

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Telephone service for travel.

Look up telephone or cordless telephone in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Early U.S. Telephone Industry Data
"Telephone" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.
Kempe, Harry Robert; Garcke, Emile (1911). "Telephone" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). pp. 547–557.
Virtual museum of early telephones
The Telephone, 1877[usurped]
The short film "Now You're Talking (1927)" is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive.
The short film "Communication (1928)" is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive.
The short film "Telephone Memories (Reel 1 of 2) (1931)" is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive.
The short film "Telephone Memories (Reel 2 of 2) (1931)" is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive.
The short film "Far Speaking (ca. 1935)" is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive.
"US 174,465". pdfpiw.uspto.gov.—Telegraphy (Bell's first telephone patent)—Alexander Graham Bell
US 186,787[usurped]—Electric Telegraphy (permanent magnet receiver)—Alexander Graham Bell
US 474,230[usurped]—Speaking Telegraph (graphite transmitter)—Thomas Edison
US 203,016[usurped]—Speaking Telephone (carbon button transmitter)—Thomas Edison
US 222,390[usurped]—Carbon Telephone (carbon granules transmitter)—Thomas Edison
US 485,311[usurped]—Telephone (solid back carbon transmitter)—Anthony C. White (Bell engineer) This design was used until 1925 and installed phones were used until the 1940s.
US 3,449,750[usurped]—Duplex Radio Communication and Signalling Apparatus—G. H. Sweigert
US 3,663,762[usurped]—Cellular Mobile Communication System—Amos Edward Joel (Bell Labs)
US 3,906,166[usurped]—Radio Telephone System (DynaTAC cell phone)—Martin Cooper et al. (Motorola)
vte
Telecommunications
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: 1876 introductionsAmerican inventionsCanadian inventionsDiscovery and invention controversiesGerman inventionsScottish inventionsOffice equipmentTelecommunications equipmentTelephonyHome appliances19th-century inventions
This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 12:47 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Telephone

180 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
History

Equipment

Manner of play

Match play

Stance

Shots

Tournaments

Players

Officials
Junior tennis
Injuries
In popular culture
See also
References
Further reading
External links
Tennis

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Tennis (disambiguation).
Tennis

French singles player Guillaume Rufin serves to Czech player Tomáš Berdych in a tennis match at the 2013 Australian Open
Highest governing body	International Tennis Federation
First played	19th century, Birmingham, England, United Kingdom
Characteristics
Contact	No
Team members	Singles or doubles
Mixed-sex	Yes, separate tours and mixed doubles
Type	Outdoor or indoor
Equipment	Ball, racket, net
Venue	Tennis court
Glossary	Glossary of tennis terms
Presence
Country or region	Worldwide
Olympic	Part of Summer Olympic programme from 1896 to 1924
Demonstration sport in the 1968 and 1984 Summer Olympics
Part of Summer Olympic programme since 1988
Paralympic	Part of Summer Paralympic programme since 1992
Tennis is a racket sport that is played either individually against a single opponent (singles) or between two teams of two players each (doubles). Each player uses a tennis racket strung with a cord to strike a hollow rubber ball covered with felt over or around a net and into the opponent's court. The object is to manoeuvre the ball in such a way that the opponent is not able to play a valid return. If a player is unable to return the ball successfully, the opponent scores a point.[1][2]

Playable at all levels of society and at all ages, tennis can be played by anyone who can hold a racket, including wheelchair users. The original forms of tennis developed in France during the late Middle Ages.[3] The modern form of tennis originated in Birmingham, England, in the late 19th century as lawn tennis.[4] It had close connections to various field (lawn) games such as croquet and bowls as well as to the older racket sport today called real tennis.[5]

The rules of modern tennis have changed little since the 1890s. Two exceptions are that until 1961 the server had to keep one foot on the ground at all times,[6][7] and the adoption of the tiebreak in the 1970s.[8] A recent addition to professional tennis has been the adoption of electronic review technology coupled with a point-challenge system, which allows a player to contest the line call of a point, a system known as Hawk-Eye.[9][10]

Tennis is played by millions of recreational players and is a popular worldwide spectator sport.[11] The four Grand Slam tournaments (also referred to as the majors) are especially popular and are considered the highest level of competition for the sport. These tournaments are the Australian Open, played on hardcourts; the French Open, played on red clay courts; Wimbledon, played on grass courts; and the US Open, also played on hardcourts.[12] Additionally, tennis was one of the original Olympic sports, and has been consistently competed in the Summer Olympic Games since 1988.

History
Main article: History of tennis
Predecessors

Painting from Cremona in the late-16th century

Jeu de paume in the 17th century
Historians believe that the game's ancient origin lay in 12th-century northern France, where a ball was struck with the palm of the hand.[13] Louis X of France was a keen player of jeu de paume ("game of the palm"), which evolved into real tennis, and became notable as the first person to construct indoor tennis courts in the modern style. Louis was unhappy with playing tennis outdoors and accordingly had indoor, enclosed courts made in Paris "around the end of the 13th century".[14] In due course this design spread across royal palaces all over Europe.[14] In June 1316 at Vincennes, Val-de-Marne, and following a particularly exhausting game, Louis drank a large quantity of cooled wine and subsequently died of either pneumonia or pleurisy, although there was also suspicion of poisoning.[15] Because of the contemporary accounts of his death, Louis X is history's first tennis player known by name.[15] Another of the early enthusiasts of the game was King Charles V of France, who had a court set up at the Louvre Palace.[16]

The word tennis probably comes from the French term tenez, which can be translated as "hold!", "receive!" or "take!", an interjection used as a call from the server to his opponent.[17] It was popular in England and France, although the game was only played indoors, where the ball could be hit off the wall. Henry VIII of England was a big fan of this game, which is now known as real tennis.[18]

An epitaph in St Michael's Church, Coventry, written c. 1705, read, in part:[19]

Here lyes an old toss'd Tennis Ball:
Was racketted, from spring to fall,
With so much heat and so much hast,
Time's arm for shame grew tyred at last.

During the 18th and early 19th centuries, as real tennis declined, new racket sports emerged in England.[20]

The invention of the first lawn mower in Britain in 1830 is believed to have been a catalyst for the preparation of modern-style grass courts, sporting ovals, playing fields, pitches, greens, etc. This in turn led to the codification of modern rules for many sports, including lawn tennis, most football codes, lawn bowls and others.[21]

Origins of the modern game

Augurio Perera's house in Edgbaston, Birmingham, England, where he and Harry Gem first played the modern game of lawn tennis
Between 1859 and 1865, Harry Gem, a solicitor, and his friend Augurio Perera developed a game that combined elements of racquets and the Basque ball game pelota, which they played on Perera's croquet lawn in Birmingham, England.[22][23] In 1872, along with two local doctors, they founded the world's first tennis club on Avenue Road, Leamington Spa.[24] This is where "lawn tennis" was used as the name of an activity by a club for the first time.

In Tennis: A Cultural History, Heiner Gillmeister reveals that on 8 December 1874, British army officer Walter Clopton Wingfield wrote to Harry Gem, commenting that he (Wingfield) had been experimenting with his version of lawn tennis "for a year and a half".[25] In December 1873, Wingfield designed and patented a game which he called sphairistikè (Greek: σφαιριστική, meaning "ball-playing"), and which was soon known simply as "sticky" – for the amusement of guests at a garden party on his friend's estate of Nantclwyd Hall, in Llanelidan, Wales.[26] According to R. D. C. Evans, turfgrass agronomist, "Sports historians all agree that [Wingfield] deserves much of the credit for the development of modern tennis."[20][27] According to Honor Godfrey, museum curator at Wimbledon, Wingfield "popularized this game enormously. He produced a boxed set which included a net, poles, rackets, balls for playing the game – and most importantly you had his rules. He was absolutely terrific at marketing and he sent his game all over the world. He had very good connections with the clergy, the law profession, and the aristocracy and he sent thousands of sets out in the first year or so, in 1874."[28] The world's oldest annual tennis tournament took place at Leamington Lawn Tennis Club in Birmingham in 1874.[29] This was three years before the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club would hold its first championships at Wimbledon, in 1877. The first Championships culminated in a significant debate on how to standardise the rules.[28]


Lawn tennis in the US, 1887
In the United States in 1874, Mary Ewing Outerbridge, a young socialite, returned from Bermuda with a sphairistikè set. She became fascinated by the game of tennis after watching British army officers play.[30] She laid out a tennis court at the Staten Island Cricket Club at Camp Washington, Tompkinsville, Staten Island, New York. The first American National championship was played there in September 1880. An Englishman named O.E. Woodhouse won the singles title, and a silver cup worth $100, by defeating Canadian I. F. Hellmuth.[31] There was also a doubles match which was won by a local pair. There were different rules at each club. The ball in Boston was larger than the one normally used in New York.

On 21 May 1881, the oldest nationwide tennis organization in the world[32] was formed, the United States National Lawn Tennis Association (now the United States Tennis Association) in order to standardize the rules and organize competitions.[33] The US National Men's Singles Championship, now the US Open, was first held in 1881 at the Newport Casino, Newport, Rhode Island.[34] The US National Women's Singles Championships were first held in 1887 in Philadelphia.[35]

Tennis also became popular in France, where the French Championships date to 1891, although until 1925 they were open only to tennis players who were members of French clubs.[36] Thus, Wimbledon, the US Open, the French Open and the Australian Open (dating to 1905) became and have remained the most prestigious events in tennis.[37][38] Together, these four events are called the Majors or Slams (a term borrowed from bridge rather than baseball).[39]

In 1913, the International Lawn Tennis Federation (ILTF), now the International Tennis Federation (ITF), was founded and established three official tournaments as the major championships of the day. The World Grass Court Championships were awarded to Great Britain. The World Hard Court Championships were awarded to France; the term "hard court" was used for clay courts at the time. Some tournaments were held in Belgium instead. And the World Covered Court Championships for indoor courts were awarded annually; Sweden, France, Great Britain, Denmark, Switzerland and Spain each hosted the tournament.[40] At a meeting held on 16 March 1923 in Paris, the title "World Championship" was dropped and a new category of "Official Championship" was created for events in Great Britain, France, the US and Australia [41] – today's Grand Slam events.[40][42] The impact on the four recipient nations to replace the "world championships" with "official championships" was simple in a general sense: each became a major nation of the federation with enhanced voting power, and each now operated a major event.[40]

The comprehensive rules promulgated in 1924 by the ILTF have remained largely stable in the ensuing 80 years, the one major change being the addition of the tiebreak system designed by Jimmy Van Alen.[43] That same year, tennis withdrew from the Olympics after the 1924 Games, but returned 60 years later as a 21-and-under demonstration event in 1984. This reinstatement was credited by the efforts of then ITF president Philippe Chatrier, ITF general secretary David Gray and ITF vice president Pablo Llorens, with support from International Olympic Committee president Juan Antonio Samaranch. The success of the event was overwhelming, and the IOC decided to reintroduce tennis as a full-medal sport at Seoul in 1988.[44][45]


Tennis doubles final at 1896 Olympic Games
The Davis Cup, an annual competition between men's national teams, dates to 1900.[46] The analogous competition for women's national teams, the Fed Cup, was founded as the Federation Cup in 1963 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the ITF.[47]

In 1926, promoter C. C. Pyle established the first professional tennis tour with a group of American and French tennis players playing exhibition matches to paying audiences.[38][48] The most notable of these early professionals were the American Vinnie Richards and the Frenchwoman Suzanne Lenglen.[38][49] Players turned pro would no longer be permitted to compete in the major (amateur) tournaments.[38]

In 1968, commercial pressures and rumours of some amateurs taking money under the table led to the abandonment of this distinction, inaugurating the Open Era, in which all players could compete in all tournaments, and top players were able to make their living from tennis.[50] With the beginning of the Open Era, the establishment of an international professional tennis circuit, and revenues from the sale of television rights, tennis's popularity has spread worldwide, and the sport has shed its middle-class English-speaking image[51] (although it is acknowledged that this stereotype still exists).[51][52]

In 1954, Van Alen founded the International Tennis Hall of Fame, a nonprofit museum in Newport, Rhode Island.[53] The building contains a large collection of tennis memorabilia as well as a hall of fame honouring prominent members and tennis players from all over the world.[54]

Equipment
Main article: Tennis technology
Part of the appeal of tennis stems from the simplicity of equipment required for play. Beginners need only a racket and balls.[1]

Rackets
Main article: Racket (sports equipment) § Tennis

Wooden racket – c. 1920s
The components of a tennis racket include a handle, known as the grip, connected to a neck which joins a roughly elliptical frame that holds a matrix of tightly pulled strings. For the first 100 years of the modern game, rackets were made of wood and of standard size, and strings were of animal gut. Laminated wood construction yielded more strength in rackets used through most of the 20th century until first metal and then composites of carbon graphite, ceramics, and lighter metals such as titanium were introduced. These stronger materials enabled the production of oversized rackets that yielded yet more power. Meanwhile, technology led to the use of synthetic strings that match the feel of gut yet with added durability.

Under modern rules of tennis, the rackets must adhere to the following guidelines;[55]

The hitting area, composed of the strings, must be flat and generally uniform.
The frame of the hitting area may not be more than 29 inches (74 cm) in length and 12.5 inches (32 cm) in width.
The entire racket must be of a fixed shape, size, weight, and weight distribution. There may not be any energy source built into the rackets.
The rackets must not provide any kind of communication, instruction or advice to the player during the match.
The rules regarding rackets have changed over time, as material and engineering advances have been made. For example, the maximum length of the frame had been 32 inches (81 cm) until 1997, when it was shortened to 29 inches (74 cm).[56]

Many companies manufacture and distribute tennis rackets. Wilson, Head and Babolat are three of the most commonly used brands; however, many more companies exist.[57] The same companies sponsor players to use these rackets in the hopes that the company name will become better known by the public.

Strings
Main article: Strings (tennis)
There are multiple types of tennis strings, including natural gut and synthetic stings made from materials such as nylon, kevlar, or polyester.[58]


Two different tennis strings of lengths 12m (left), and 200 m (right)
Natural gut
The first type of tennis strings available were natural gut strings, introduced by Babolat. They were the only type used until synthetic strings were introduced in the 1950s. Natural gut strings are still used frequently by players such as Roger Federer. They are made from cow intestines, and provide increased power, and are easier on the arm than most strings.[59]

Synthetic
Most synthetic strings are made from monofilament or multifiliament nylon strings. Monofilament strings are cheap to buy, and are used widely by many recreational level players for their all round performance, while multifilament strings are created to mimic natural gut more closely by weaving together fibres, but are generally more expensive than their monofilament counterparts.[58] Polyester strings allow for more spin on the ball than any other string, due to their firm strings, while keeping control of the ball, and this is why many players use them, especially higher player ones.[60] Kevlar tennis strings are highly durable, and are mostly used by players that frequently break strings, because they maintain tension well, but these strings can be stiff on the arm.[61]

Hybrid strings
Hybrid stringing is when a tennis racket is strung with two different strings for the mains (the vertical strings) and the crosses (the horizontal strings). This is most commonly done with two different strings that are made of different materials, but can also be done with two different types of the same string. A notable example of a player using hybrid strings is Roger Federer, using natural gut strings in his mains and polyester strings in his crosses.[62]

Balls
Main article: Tennis ball

A tennis racket and balls.
Tennis balls were originally made of cloth strips stitched together with thread and stuffed with feathers.[63] Modern tennis balls are made of hollow vulcanized rubber with a felt coating. Traditionally white, the predominant colour was gradually changed to optic yellow in the latter part of the 20th century to allow for improved visibility. Tennis balls must conform to certain criteria for size, weight, deformation, and bounce to be approved for regulation play. The International Tennis Federation (ITF) defines the official diameter as 65.41–68.58 mm (2.575–2.700 in). Balls must weigh between 56.0 and 59.4 g (1.98 and 2.10 oz).[64] Tennis balls were traditionally manufactured in the United States and Europe. Although the process of producing the balls has remained virtually unchanged for the past 100 years, the majority of manufacturing now takes place in the Far East. The relocation is due to cheaper labour costs and materials in the region.[65] Tournaments that are played under the ITF Rules of Tennis must use balls that are approved by the International Tennis Federation (ITF) and be named on the official ITF list of approved tennis balls.[66]

Manner of play

The dimensions of a tennis court
For individual terms, see Glossary of tennis terms.
Court
Main article: Tennis court
Tennis is played on a rectangular, flat surface. The court is 78 feet (23.77 m) long, and 27 feet (8.2 m) wide for singles matches and 36 ft (11 m) for doubles matches.[67] Additional clear space around the court is required in order for players to reach overrun balls. A net is stretched across the full width of the court, parallel with the baselines, dividing it into two equal ends. It is held up by either a cord or metal cable of diameter no greater than 0.8 cm (1⁄3 in).[66] The net is 3 feet 6 inches (1.07 m) high at the posts and 3 feet (0.91 m) high in the centre.[67] The net posts are 3 feet (0.91 m) outside the doubles court on each side or, for a singles net, 3 feet (0.91 m) outside the singles court on each side.

The modern tennis court owes its design to Major Walter Clopton Wingfield. In 1873, Wingfield patented a court much the same as the current one for his stické tennis (sphairistike). This template was modified in 1875 to the court design that exists today, with markings similar to Wingfield's version, but with the hourglass shape of his court changed to a rectangle.[68]

Tennis is unusual in that it is played on a variety of surfaces.[69] Grass, clay, and hard courts of concrete or asphalt topped with acrylic are the most common. Occasionally carpet is used for indoor play, with hardwood flooring having been historically used. Artificial turf courts can also be found.

Lines
The lines that delineate the width of the court are called the baseline (farthest back) and the service line (middle of the court). The short mark in the centre of each baseline is referred to as either the hash mark or the centre mark. The outermost lines that make up the length are called the doubles sidelines; they are the boundaries for doubles matches. The lines to the inside of the doubles sidelines are the singles sidelines, and are the boundaries in singles play. The area between a doubles sideline and the nearest singles sideline is called the doubles alley, playable in doubles play. The line that runs across the centre of a player's side of the court is called the service line because the serve must be delivered into the area between the service line and the net on the receiving side. Despite its name, this is not where a player legally stands when making a serve.[70]

The line dividing the service line in two is called the centre line or centre service line. The boxes this centre line creates are called the service boxes; depending on a player's position, they have to hit the ball into one of these when serving.[71] A ball is out only if none of it has hit the area inside the lines, or the line, upon its first bounce. All lines are required to be between 1 and 2 inches (25 and 51 mm) in width, with the exception of the baseline which can be up to 4 inches (100 mm) wide, although in practice it is often the same width as the others.[70]

Play of a single point
Main article: Point (tennis)

Two players before a serve.
The players or teams start on opposite sides of the net. One player is designated the server, and the opposing player is the receiver. The choice to be server or receiver in the first game and the choice of ends is decided by a coin toss before the warm-up starts. Service alternates game by game between the two players or teams. For each point, the server starts behind the baseline, between the centre mark and the sideline. The receiver may start anywhere on their side of the net. When the receiver is ready, the server will serve, although the receiver must play to the pace of the server.

For a service to be legal, the ball must travel over the net without touching it into the diagonally opposite service box. If the ball hits the net but lands in the service box, this is a let or net service, which is void, and the server retakes that serve. The player can serve any number of let services in a point and they are always treated as voids and not as faults. A fault is a serve that falls long or wide of the service box, or does not clear the net. There is also a "foot fault" when a player's foot touches the baseline or an extension of the centre mark before the ball is hit. If the second service, after a fault, is also a fault, the server double faults, and the receiver wins the point. However, if the serve is in, it is considered a legal service.

A legal service starts a rally, in which the players alternate hitting the ball across the net. A legal return consists of a player hitting the ball so that it falls in the server's court, before it has bounced twice or hit any fixtures except the net. A player or team cannot hit the ball twice in a row. The ball must travel over or round the net into the other players' court. A ball that hits the net during a rally is considered a legal return as long as it crosses into the opposite side of the court. The first player or team to fail to make a legal return loses the point. The server then moves to the other side of the service line at the start of a new point.[72]

Scoring
Main article: Tennis scoring system
"Break point" redirects here. For the software term, see Breakpoint.
Game, set, match

The scoreboard of a tennis match.
Game
A game consists of a sequence of points played with the same player serving. A game is won by the first player to have won at least four points in total and at least two points more than the opponent. The running score of each game is described in a manner peculiar to tennis: scores from zero to three points are described as "love", "15", "30", and "40", respectively. If at least three points have been scored by each player, making the player's scores equal at 40 apiece, the score is not called out as "40–40", but rather as "deuce". If at least three points have been scored by each side and a player has one more point than his opponent, the score of the game is "advantage" for the player in the lead. During informal games, advantage can also be called "ad in" or "van in" when the serving player is ahead, and "ad out" or "van out" when the receiving player is ahead; alternatively, either player may simply call out "my ad" or "your ad".

The score of a tennis game during play is always read with the serving player's score first. In tournament play, the chair umpire calls the point count (e.g., "15–love") after each point. At the end of a game, the chair umpire also announces the winner of the game and the overall score.[73]

Set
A set consists of a sequence of games played with service alternating between games, ending when the count of games won meets certain criteria. Typically, a player wins a set by winning at least six games and at least two games more than the opponent. If one player has won six games and the opponent five, an additional game is played. If the leading player wins that game, the player wins the set 7–5. If the trailing player wins the game (tying the set 6–6) a tiebreak is played. A tiebreak, played under a separate set of rules, allows one player to win one more game and thus the set, to give a final set score of 7–6. A tiebreak game can be won by scoring at least seven points and at least two points more than the opponent. In a tiebreak, two players serve by 'ABBA' system which has been proven to be fair.[74] If a tiebreak is not played, the set is referred to as an advantage set, where the set continues without limit until one player leads by a two-game margin. A "love set" means that the loser of the set won zero games, colloquially termed a "jam donut" in the US.[75] In tournament play, the chair umpire announces the winner of the set and the overall score. The final score in sets is always read with the winning player's score first, e.g. "6–2, 4–6, 6–0, 7–5".

Match
A match consists of a sequence of sets. The outcome is determined through a best of three or five sets system. On the professional circuit, men play best-of-five-set matches at all four Grand Slam tournaments, Davis Cup, and the final of the Olympic Games and best-of-three-set matches at all other tournaments, while women play best-of-three-set matches at all tournaments. The first player to win two sets in a best-of-three, or three sets in a best-of-five, wins the match.[76] Only in the final sets of matches at the Olympic Games and Fed Cup are tiebreaks not played. In these cases, sets are played indefinitely until one player has a two-game lead, occasionally leading to some remarkably long matches.

In tournament play, the chair umpire announces the end of the match with the well-known phrase "Game, set, match" followed by the winning person's or team's name.

Special point terms
Game point
A game point occurs in tennis whenever the player who is in the lead in the game needs only one more point to win the game. The terminology is extended to sets (set point), matches (match point), and even championships (championship point). For example, if the player who is serving has a score of 40–love, the player has a triple game point (triple set point, etc.) as the player has three consecutive chances to win the game. Game points, set points, and match points are not part of official scoring and are not announced by the chair umpire in tournament play.

Break point
A break point occurs if the receiver, not the server, has a chance to win the game with the next point. Break points are of particular importance because serving is generally considered advantageous, with servers being expected to win games in which they are serving. A receiver who has one (score of 30–40 or advantage), two (score of 15–40) or three (score of love–40) consecutive chances to win the game has break point, double break point or triple break point, respectively. If the receiver does, in fact, win their break point, the game is awarded to the receiver, and the receiver is said to have converted their break point. If the receiver fails to win their break point it is called a failure to convert. Winning break points, and thus the game, is also referred to as breaking serve, as the receiver has disrupted, or broken the natural advantage of the server. If in the following game the previous server also wins a break point it is referred to as breaking back. Except where tiebreaks apply, at least one break of serve is required to win a set (otherwise a two-game lead would never occur).

Rule variations
See also: Types of tennis match
No ad
From 'No advantage'. Scoring method created by Jimmy Van Alen. The first player or doubles team to win four points wins the game, regardless of whether the player or team is ahead by two points. When the game score reaches three points each, the receiver chooses which side of the court (advantage court or deuce court) the service is to be delivered on the seventh and game-deciding point. Utilized by World Team Tennis professional competition, ATP tours, WTA tours, ITF Pro Doubles and ITF Junior Doubles.[77][78]
Pro set
Instead of playing multiple sets, players may play one pro set. A pro set is first to 8 (or 10) games by a margin of two games, instead of first to 6 games. A 12-point tiebreak is usually played when the score is 8–8 (or 10–10). These are often played with no-ad scoring.
Match tiebreak
This is sometimes played instead of a third set. A match tiebreak (also called super tiebreak) is played like a regular tiebreak, but the winner must win ten points instead of seven. Match tiebreaks are used in the Hopman Cup, Grand Slams (excluding Wimbledon) and the Olympic Games for mixed doubles; on the ATP (since 2006), WTA (since 2007) and ITF (excluding four Grand Slam tournaments and the Davis Cup) tours for doubles and as a player's choice in USTA league play.
Fast4
Fast4 is a shortened format that offers a "fast" alternative, with four points, four games and four rules: there are no advantage scores, lets are played, tiebreakers apply at three games all, with it being first to five points with a "sudden death" point at four points all, and the first to four games wins the set. In the event of a no advantage deuce, the receiver gets to choose the service side. If a let occurs, the point continues as normal, and the non-receiver (in a doubles game) is permitted to return the serve. When players swap sides, they are not permitted to sit down and must be ready to play within sixty seconds. Between sets, players are permitted to sit down, and must be ready to play within ninety seconds.[79][80]
Another, however informal, tennis format is called Canadian doubles. This involves three players, with one person playing against a doubles team. The single player gets to utilize the alleys normally reserved only for a doubles team. Conversely, the doubles team does not use the alleys when executing a shot. The scoring is the same as for a regular game. This format is not sanctioned by any official body.

"Australian doubles", another informal and unsanctioned form of tennis, is played with similar rules to the Canadian doubles style, only in this version, players rotate court position after each game, each player taking a turn at playing alone against the other two. As such, each player plays doubles and singles over the course of a match, with the singles player always serving. Scoring styles vary, but one popular method is to assign a value of 2 points to each game, with the server taking both points if he or she holds serve and the doubles team each taking one if they break serve.

Wheelchair tennis can be played by able-bodied players as well as people who require a wheelchair for mobility. An extra bounce is permitted. This rule makes it possible to have mixed wheelchair and able-bodied matches. It is possible for a doubles team to consist of a wheelchair player and an able-bodied player (referred to as "one-up, one-down"), or for a wheelchair player to play against an able-bodied player. In such cases, the extra bounce is permitted for the wheelchair users only.

Match play

Convention expects that the two players shake hands at the end of a match.
Continuity
A tennis match is intended to be continuous.[81] Because stamina is a relevant factor, arbitrary delays are not permitted. In most cases, service is required to occur no more than 20 seconds after the end of the previous point.[81] This is increased to 90 seconds when the players change ends (after every odd-numbered game), and a 2-minute break is permitted between sets.[81] Other than this, breaks are permitted only when forced by events beyond the players' control, such as rain, damaged footwear, damaged racket, or the need to retrieve an errant ball. Should a player be deemed to be stalling repeatedly, the chair umpire may initially give a warning followed by subsequent penalties of "point", "game", and default of the match for the player who is consistently taking longer than the allowed time limit.[82]

In the event of a rain delay, darkness or other external conditions halting play, the match is resumed at a later time, with the same score as at the time of the delay, and each player at the same end of the court as when rain halted play, or as close to the same relative compass point if play is resumed on a different court.

Ball changes
Balls wear out quickly in serious play and, therefore, in ATP and WTA tournaments, they are changed after every nine games with the first change occurring after only seven games, because the first set of balls is also used for the pre-match warm-up.[64] In ITF tournaments like Fed Cup, the balls are changed after every eleven games (rather than nine) with the first change occurring after only nine games (instead of seven). An exception is that a ball change may not take place at the beginning of a tiebreaker, in which case the ball change is delayed until the beginning of the second game of the next set.[66] As a courtesy to the receiver, the server will often signal to the receiver before the first serve of the game in which new balls are used as a reminder that they are using new balls. Continuity of the balls' condition is considered part of the game, so if a re-warm-up is required after an extended break in play (usually due to rain), then the re-warm-up is done using a separate set of balls, and use of the match balls is resumed only when play resumes.

On-court coaching
A recent rule change is to allow coaching on court on a limited basis during a match.[83][84][85][86] This has been introduced in women's tennis for WTA Tour events in 2009 and allows the player to request her coach once per set.[87]

Stance
Stance refers to the way a player prepares themselves in order to best be able to return a shot. Essentially, it enables them to move quickly in order to achieve a particular stroke. There are four main stances in modern tennis: open, semi-open, closed, and neutral. All four stances involve the player crouching in some manner: as well as being a more efficient striking posture, it allows them to isometrically preload their muscles in order to play the stroke more dynamically. What stance is selected is strongly influenced by shot selection. A player may quickly alter their stance depending on the circumstances and the type of shot they intend to play. Any given stance also alters dramatically based upon the actual playing of the shot with dynamic movements and shifts of body weight occurring.[88][89]

Open stance
This is the most common stance in tennis. The player's feet are placed parallel to the net. They may be pointing sideways, directly at the net or diagonally towards it. This stance allows for a high degree of torso rotation which can add significant power to the stroke. This process is sometimes likened to the coiling and uncoiling of a spring. i.e. the torso is rotated as a means of preloading the muscular system in preparation for playing the stroke: this is the coiling phase. When the stroke is played the torso rotates to face forwards again, called uncoiling, and adds significant power to the stroke. A disadvantage of this stance is that it does not always allow 'for proper weight transfer and maintenance of balance'[88] when making powerful strokes. It is commonly used for forehand strokes; double-handed backhands can also be made effectively from it.

Semi-open stance
This stance is somewhere between open and closed and is a very flexible stance. The feet are aligned diagonally towards the net. It allows for a lot of shoulder rotation and the torso can be coiled, before being uncoiled into the shot in order to increase the power of the shot. It is commonly used in modern tennis especially by 'top professional players on the forehand'.[88] Two-handed backhands can also be employed from this stance.

Closed stance
The closed stance is the least commonly used of the three main stances. One foot is placed further towards the net with the other foot further from it; there is a diagonal alignment between the feet. It allows for effective torso rotation in order to increase the power of the shot. It is usually used to play backhand shots and it is rare to see forehand shots played from it. A stroke from this stance may entail the rear foot coming completely off the floor with bodyweight being transferred entirely to the front foot.[88] [89]

Neutral stance
This is sometimes also referred to as the square stance. One foot is positioned closer to the net and ahead of the other which is behind and in line with it. Both feet are aligned at a 90 degree angle to the net. The neutral stance is often taught early because 'It allows beginners to learn about shifting weight and rotation of the body.'[89] Forehands and backhands may be made from it.[90]

Shots
Main article: Tennis shots
Competent tennis players have eight basic shots in their repertoire: the serve, forehand, backhand, volley, half-volley, overhead smash, drop shot, and lob.

Grip
Main article: Grip (Tennis)
A grip is a way of holding the racket in order to hit shots during a match. The grip affects the angle of the racket face when it hits the ball and influences the pace, spin, and placement of the shot. Players use various grips during play, including the Continental (The "Handshake Grip"), Eastern (either semi-eastern or full eastern, usually used for backhands), and Western (semi-western or full western, usually for forehand grips) grips. Most players change grips during a match depending on what shot they are hitting; for example, slice shots and serves call for a Continental grip.[91]

Serve
Main article: Serve (tennis)

Roger Federer in a serve motion.
A serve (or, more formally, a "service") in tennis is a shot to start a point. The serve is initiated by tossing the ball into the air and hitting it (usually near the apex of its trajectory) into the diagonally opposite service box without touching the net. The serve may be hit under- or overhand although underhand serving remains a rarity.[92] If the ball hits the net on the first serve and bounces over into the correct diagonal box then it is called a "let" and the server gets two more additional serves to get it in. There can also be a let if the server serves the ball and the receiver isn't prepared.[66] If the server misses his or her first serve and gets a let on the second serve, then they get one more try to get the serve in the box.

Experienced players strive to master the conventional overhand serve to maximize its power and placement. The server may employ different types of serve including flat serve, topspin serve, slice serve, and kick (American twist) serve. A reverse type of spin serve is hit in a manner that spins the ball opposite the natural spin of the server, the spin direction depending upon right- or left-handedness. If the ball is spinning counterclockwise, it will curve right from the hitter's point of view and curve left if spinning clockwise.[93]

Some servers are content to use the serve simply to initiate the point; however, advanced players often try to hit a winning shot with their serve. A winning serve that is not touched by the opponent is called an "ace".

Forehand
Main article: Forehand

Juan Martín del Potro in a forehand motion.
For a right-handed player, the forehand is a stroke that begins on the right side of the body, continues across the body as contact is made with the ball, and ends on the left side of the body. There are various grips for executing the forehand, and their popularity has fluctuated over the years. The most important ones are the continental, the eastern, the semi-western, and the western. For a number of years, the small, frail 1920s player Bill Johnston was considered by many to have had the best forehand of all time, a stroke that he hit shoulder-high using a western grip. Few top players used the western grip after the 1920s, but in the latter part of the 20th century, as shot-making techniques and equipment changed radically, the western forehand made a strong comeback and is now used by many modern players. No matter which grip is used, most forehands are generally executed with one hand holding the racket, but there have been fine players with two-handed forehands. In the 1940s and 50s, the Ecuadorian/American player Pancho Segura used a two-handed forehand to achieve a devastating effect against larger, more powerful players. Players such as Monica Seles or France's Fabrice Santoro and Marion Bartoli are also notable players known for their two-handed forehands.[94]

Backhand
Main article: Backhand

Novak Djokovic in a two-handed backhand motion.
For right-handed players, the backhand is a stroke that begins on the left side of their body, continues across their body as contact is made with the ball, and ends on the right side of their body. It can be executed with either one hand or with both and is generally considered more difficult to master than the forehand. For most of the 20th century, the backhand was performed with one hand, using either an eastern or a continental grip. The first notable players to use two hands were the 1930s Australians Vivian McGrath and John Bromwich, but they were lone exceptions. The two-handed grip gained popularity in the 1970s as Björn Borg, Chris Evert, Jimmy Connors, and later Mats Wilander and Marat Safin used it to great effect, and it is now used by a large number of the world's best players, including Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal and Serena Williams.[95]

Two hands give the player more control, while one hand can generate a slice shot, applying backspin on the ball to produce a low trajectory bounce. Reach is also limited with the two-handed shot. The player long considered to have had the best backhand of all time, Don Budge, had a powerful one-handed stroke in the 1930s and 1940s that imparted topspin onto the ball. Ken Rosewall, another player noted for his one-handed backhand, used a very accurate slice backhand through the 1950s and 1960s. A small number of players, notably Monica Seles, use two hands on both the backhand and forehand sides.

Other shots
A volley is a shot returned to the opponent in mid-air before the ball bounces, generally performed near the net, and is usually made with a stiff-wristed punching motion to hit the ball into an open area of the opponent's court. The half volley is made by hitting the ball on the rise just after it has bounced, also generally in the vicinity of the net, and played with the racket close to the ground.[96] The swinging volley is hit out of the air as the player approaches the net. It is an offensive shot used to take preparation time away from the opponent, as it returns the ball into the opponent's court much faster than a standard volley.

From a poor defensive position on the baseline, the lob can be used as either an offensive or defensive weapon, hitting the ball high and deep into the opponent's court to either enable the lobber to get into better defensive position or to win the point outright by hitting it over the opponent's head. If the lob is not hit deeply enough into the other court, however, an opponent near the net may then hit an overhead smash, a hard, serve-like shot, to try to end the point.

A difficult shot in tennis is the return of an attempted lob over the backhand side of a player. When the contact point is higher than the reach of a two-handed backhand, most players will try to execute a high slice (under the ball or sideways). Fewer players attempt the backhand sky-hook or smash. Rarely, a player will go for a high topspin backhand, while themselves in the air. A successful execution of any of these alternatives requires balance and timing, with less margin of error than the lower contact point backhands, since this shot is a break in the regular pattern of play.

If their opponent is deep in their court, a player may suddenly employ an unexpected drop shot, by softly tapping the ball just over the net so that the opponent is unable to run in fast enough to retrieve it. Advanced players will often apply back spin to a drop shot, causing the ball to "skid" upon landing and bounce sideways, with less forward momentum toward their opponent, or even backwards towards the net, thus making it even more difficult to return.

Tournaments
See also: List of tennis tournaments
Tournaments are often organized by gender and number of players. Common tournament configurations include men's singles, women's singles, and doubles, where two players play on each side of the net. Tournaments may be organized for specific age groups, with upper age limits for youth and lower age limits for senior players. Example of this include the Orange Bowl and Les Petits As junior tournaments. There are also tournaments for players with disabilities, such as wheelchair tennis and deaf tennis.[97] In the four Grand Slam tournaments, the singles draws are limited to 128 players for each gender.

Most large tournaments seed players, but players may also be matched by their skill level. According to how well a person does in sanctioned play, a player is given a rating that is adjusted periodically to maintain competitive matches. For example, the United States Tennis Association administers the National Tennis Rating Program (NTRP), which rates players between 1.0 and 7.0 in 1/2 point increments. Average club players under this system would rate 3.0–4.5 while world class players would be 7.0 on this scale.

Grand Slam tournaments

A tennis match at Centre Court of Wimbledon in 2007.
The four Grand Slam tournaments are considered to be the most prestigious tennis events in the world. They are held annually and comprise, in chronological order, the Australian Open, the French Open, Wimbledon, and the US Open. Apart from the Olympic Games, Davis Cup, Fed Cup, and Hopman Cup, they are the only tournaments regulated by the International Tennis Federation (ITF).[98] The ITF's national associations, Tennis Australia (Australian Open), the Fédération Française de Tennis (French Open), the Lawn Tennis Association (Wimbledon) and the United States Tennis Association (US Open) are delegated the responsibility to organize these events.[98]

Aside from the historical significance of these events, they also carry larger prize funds than any other tour event and are worth double the number of ranking points to the champion than in the next echelon of tournaments, the ATP Masters 1000 (men) and Premier events (women).[99][100] Another distinguishing feature is the number of players in the singles draw. There are 128, more than any other professional tennis tournament. This draw is composed of 32 seeded players, other players ranked in the world's top 100, qualifiers, and players who receive invitations through wild cards. Grand Slam men's tournaments have best-of-five set matches while the women play best-of-three. Grand Slam tournaments are among the small number of events that last two weeks, the others being the Indian Wells Masters and the Miami Masters.

Currently, the Grand Slam tournaments are the only tour events that have mixed doubles contests. Grand Slam tournaments are held in conjunction with wheelchair tennis tournaments and junior tennis competitions. These tournaments also contain their own idiosyncrasies. For example, players at Wimbledon are required to wear predominantly white. Andre Agassi chose to skip Wimbledon from 1988 through 1990 citing the event's traditionalism, particularly its "predominantly white" dress code.[101] Wimbledon has its own particular methods for disseminating tickets, often leading tennis fans to follow complex procedures to obtain tickets.[102]

Overview of Grand Slam tournaments
Grand Slam	First held	Held	Location	Surface	Date	Prize money
Australian Open	1905	111 times	Melbourne	Hard	January–February	A$76,500,000 (2023)
French Open	1891*	93 times	Paris	Clay	May–June	€49,600,000 (2023)
Wimbledon	1877	136 times	London	Grass	June–July	£44,700,000 (2023)
US Open	1881	143 times	New York City	Hard	August–September	US$65,000,000 (2023)
The French Open became an international tournament in 1925.
Men's tournament structure
ATP 1000
The ATP Masters 1000 is a group of nine tournaments that form the second-highest echelon in men's tennis. Each event is held annually, and a win at one of these events is worth 1000 ranking points. When the ATP, led by Hamilton Jordan, began running the men's tour in 1990, the directors designated the top nine tournaments, outside of the Grand Slam events, as "Super 9" events.[103] In 2000 this became the Tennis Masters Series and in 2004 the ATP Masters Series. In November at the end of the tennis year, the world's top eight players compete in the ATP Finals, a tournament with a rotating locale. It is currently held in Turin.[104]

In August 2007 the ATP announced major changes to the tour that were introduced in 2009. The Masters Series was renamed to the "ATP Masters 1000", the addition of the number 1000 referring to the number of ranking points earned by the winner of each tournament. Contrary to earlier plans, the number of tournaments was not reduced from nine to eight and the Monte-Carlo Masters remains part of the series although, unlike the other events, it does not have a mandatory player commitment. The Hamburg Masters has been downgraded to a 500-point event. The Madrid Masters moved to May and onto clay courts, and a new tournament in Shanghai took over Madrid's former indoor October slot. As of 2011 six of the nine "1000" level tournaments are combined ATP and WTA events.[105]

500 and 250 series
The third and fourth tier of men's tennis tournaments are formed by the ATP 500 series, consisting of 11 tournaments, and the ATP 250 series with 40 tournaments.[106] Like the ATP Masters 1000, these events offer various amounts of prize money and the numbers refer to the number of ranking points earned by the winner of a tournament.[99] The Dubai Tennis Championships offer the largest financial incentive to players, with total prize money of US$2,313,975 (2012).[107] These series have various draws of 28, 32, 48 and 56 for singles and 16 and 24 for doubles. It is mandatory for leading players to enter at least four 500 events, including at least one after the US Open.

Challenger Tour and Futures tournaments
The Challenger Tour for men is the lowest level of tournament administered by the ATP. It is composed of about 150 events and, as a result, features a more diverse range of countries hosting events.[108] The majority of players use the Challenger Series at the beginning of their career to work their way up the rankings. Andre Agassi, between winning Grand Slam tournaments, plummeted to World No. 141 and used Challenger Series events for match experience and to progress back up the rankings.[109] The Challenger Series offers prize funds of between US$25,000 and US$150,000.

Below the Challenger Tour are the Futures tournaments, events on the ITF Men's Circuit. These tournaments also contribute towards a player's ATP rankings points. Futures Tournaments offer prize funds of between US$10,000 and US$15,000.[110] Approximately 530 Futures Tournaments are played each year.

Women's tournament structure
In 2021, the WTA rebranded, resembling the men's tournament series, and also providing extra simplicity for fans and consumers. The numbers do not indicate ranking points, or prize money, but is a system to help define different levels of women's tennis.

WTA 1000
The WTA 1000 Tournaments (formerly the Premier Mandatory and Premier 5 Tournaments), are a series of seven tournaments that are part of the second-highest tier in women's tennis.[111][112]

500 and 250 Series
The third and fourth tier of women's tennis tournaments are formed from the WTA 500 Series (formerly Premier 700), with fifteen tournaments, and the WTA 250 Series (formerly International), consisting of thirty tournaments.[111][113]

WTA 125
The WTA 125 Series (formerly 125K Series), is the lowest tier of women's tennis, with fourteen tournaments.[113]

Players
Professional players
Professional tennis players enjoy the same relative perks as most top sports personalities: clothing, equipment and endorsements. Like players of other individual sports such as golf, they are not salaried, but must play and finish highly in tournaments to obtain prize money.

In recent years,[when?] professional tennis players have been mocked by tabloids and fans for the involuntary or deliberate noise caused by players' grunting. This controversy has spurred the Grand Slam Committee, the International Tennis Association, and the Women's Tennis Association to teach players techniques to avoid grunting.[114]

Singles and doubles professional careers

McEnroe with Fleming playing as a doubles team at Wimbledon in the 1980s.
While players are gradually less competitive in singles by their late 20s and early 30s, they can still continue competitively in doubles (as instanced by Martina Navratilova and John McEnroe, who won doubles titles in their 40s).

In the Open Era, several female players such as Martina Navratilova, Margaret Court, Martina Hingis, Serena Williams, and Venus Williams (the latter two sisters playing together) have been prolific at both singles and doubles events throughout their careers. John McEnroe is one of the very few professional male players to be top ranked in both singles and doubles at the same time,[115][116][117] and Yevgeny Kafelnikov is the most recent male player to win multiple Grand Slams in both singles and doubles during the same period of his career.

In terms of public attention and earnings (see below), singles champions have far surpassed their doubles counterparts. The Open Era, particularly the men's side, has seen many top-ranked singles players that only sparingly compete in doubles, while having "doubles specialists" who are typically being eliminated early in the singles draw but do well in the doubles portion of a tournament. Notable doubles pairings include The Woodies (Todd Woodbridge and Mark Woodforde) and the Bryan brothers (identical twin brothers Robert Charles "Bob" Bryan and Michael Carl "Mike" Bryan). Woodbridge has disliked the term "doubles 'specialists'", saying that he and Woodforde "set a singles schedule and doubles fitted in around that", although later in Woodbridge's career he focused exclusively on doubles as his singles ranking fell too low that it was no longer financially viable to recover at that age. Woodbridge noted that while top singles players earn enough that they do not need to nor want to play doubles, he suggested that lower-ranked singles players outside the Top Ten should play doubles to earn more playing time and money.[118][119]

Olympics
The Olympics doubles tennis tournament necessitates that both members of a doubles pairing be from the same country, hence several top professional pairs such as Jamie Murray and Bruno Soares cannot compete in the Olympics. Top-ranked singles players that are usually rivals on the professional circuit, such as Boris Becker and Michael Stich, and Roger Federer and Stan Wawrinka have formed a rare doubles partnership for the Olympics. Unlike professional tennis tournaments (see below) where singles players receive much more prize money than doubles players, an Olympic medal for both singles and doubles has similar prestige. The Olympics is more of a priority for doubles champions while singles champions often skip the tournament.[118][119] While the ATP has voted for Olympic results to count towards player ranking points, WTA players voted against it.[120]

For the 2000 Olympics, Lisa Raymond was passed over for Team USA in favour of Serena Williams by captain Billie Jean King, even though Raymond was the top-ranked doubles player in the world at the time, and Raymond unsuccessfully challenged the selection.[120]

Prize money
In professional tennis tournaments such as Wimbledon, the singles competition receives the most prize money and coverage, followed by doubles, and then mixed doubles usually receive the lowest monetary awards.[121] For instance in the US Open as of 2018, the men's and women's singles prize money (US$40,912,000) accounts for 80.9 percent of total player base compensation, while men's and women's doubles (US$6,140,840), men's and women's singles qualifying (US$3,008,000), and mixed doubles (US$505,000) account for 12.1 percent, 5.9 percent, and 1.0 percent, respectively. The singles winner receives US$3,800,000, while the doubles winning pair receives $700,000 and the mixed doubles winning pair receives US$155,000.[122]

Grand Slam tournament winners
See also: Lists of tennis records and statistics
The following players have won at least five singles titles at Grand Slam tournaments (active players in bold):

Men	Titles
Serbia Novak Djokovic	24
Spain Rafael Nadal	22
Switzerland Roger Federer	20
United States Pete Sampras	14
Australia Roy Emerson	12
Australia Rod Laver	11
Sweden Björn Borg
United States Bill Tilden	10
United Kingdom Fred Perry	8
Australia Ken Rosewall
United States Jimmy Connors
Czechoslovakia Ivan Lendl
United States Andre Agassi
United Kingdom William Renshaw	7
United States Richard Sears
United States William Larned
France Henri Cochet
France René Lacoste
Australia John Newcombe
United States John McEnroe
Sweden Mats Wilander
United Kingdom Laurence Doherty	6
New Zealand Anthony Wilding
United States Donald Budge
Australia Jack Crawford
Germany Boris Becker
Sweden Stefan Edberg
Australia Frank Sedgman	5
United States Tony Trabert
Women	Titles
Australia Margaret Court	24
United States Serena Williams	23
Germany Steffi Graf	22
United States Helen Wills Moody	19
United States Chris Evert	18
Czechoslovakia/United States Martina Navratilova
United States Billie Jean King	12
United States Maureen Connolly Brinker	9
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/United States Monica Seles
Norway/United States Molla Bjurstedt Mallory	8
France Suzanne Lenglen
United Kingdom Dorothea Lambert Chambers	7
Brazil Maria Bueno
Australia Evonne Goolagong Cawley
United States Venus Williams
Belgium Justine Henin
United Kingdom Blanche Bingley Hillyard	6
United States Doris Hart
United States Margaret Osborne duPont
Australia Nancye Wynne Bolton
United States Louise Brough Clapp
United Kingdom Lottie Dod	5
United Kingdom Charlotte Cooper Sterry
Australia Daphne Akhurst Cozens
United States Helen Jacobs
United States Alice Marble
United States Pauline Betz Addie
United States Althea Gibson
Switzerland Martina Hingis
Russia Maria Sharapova
Switzerland Iga Świątek

Greatest male players
Further information: Tennis male players statistics and World number one male tennis player rankings
A frequent topic of discussion among tennis fans and commentators is who was the greatest male singles player of all time. By a large margin, an Associated Press poll in 1950 named Bill Tilden as the greatest player of the first half of the 20th century.[123] From 1920 to 1930, Tilden won singles titles at Wimbledon three times and the US Championships seven times. In 1938, however, Donald Budge became the first person to win all four major singles titles during the same calendar year, the Grand Slam, and won six consecutive major titles in 1937 and 1938. Tilden called Budge "the finest player 365 days a year that ever lived."[124] In his 1979 autobiography, Jack Kramer said that, based on consistent play, Budge was the greatest player ever.[125] Some observers, however, also felt that Kramer deserved consideration for the title. Kramer was among the few who dominated amateur and professional tennis during the late 1940s and early 1950s. Tony Trabert has said that of the players he saw before the start of the Open Era, Kramer was the best male champion.[126]

By the 1960s, Budge and others had added Pancho Gonzales and Lew Hoad to the list of contenders. Budge reportedly believed that Gonzales was the greatest player ever.[127] Gonzales said about Hoad, "When Lew's game was at its peak nobody could touch him. ... I think his game was the best game ever. Better than mine. He was capable of making more shots than anybody. His two volleys were great. His overhead was enormous. He had the most natural tennis mind with the most natural tennis physique."[128]

Before and during the Open Era, Rod Laver remains the only male player in history to have won the calendar year Grand Slam twice in 1962 and 1969 [129] and also the calendar year Professional Grand Slam in 1967.[130]

Jimmy Connors, Björn Borg, and John McEnroe had a fierce rivalry in the late 1970s and early 1980s that propelled "the men's game to new heights of popularity".[131] Connors had a long and prolific career and holds the Open Era men's singles records of 109 titles including eight Grand Slams, 1,557 matches played, and 1,274 match wins. Borg was regarded by his contemporaries as among the greatest ever, having a calm court demeanor and unrivalled physical conditioning, winning six French Opens and five straight Wimbledon titles, retiring at age 26 when he was still in his prime. McEnroe attained the No. 1 ranking in both singles and doubles, finishing his career with 77 singles and 78 doubles titles; this remains the highest men's combined total of the Open Era.[132]

The Agassi–Sampras rivalry showcased the two best players in the 1990s.[133] Sampras had a precise and powerful serve while Agassi was considered to be one of the best service returners in the history of the game.[134][135][136] By the early 2000s, Pete Sampras had won a then-record of 14 Grand Slam titles which was by far the most among his contemporaries. Sampras also held the record for most weeks at No. 1 with 286 until it was broken a decade later by Federer and Djokovic after that. Andre Agassi, was the first player to complete the Career Grand Slam on all modern three surfaces (hard, grass, and clay courts) as previous winners of Grand Slam tournaments played in an era of grass and clay only (Rod Laver and Ken Rosewall also won major Pro tournaments on the three surfaces). Agassi also is the only player to win all four Grand Slam titles along with the year-end championships and the olympics. Both Sampras and Agassi are regarded to be among the greatest players of all time.[134][137][138]

By the early twenty-first century, the 'Big Three' of Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic have dominated men's singles tennis for two decades,[139][140] collectively winning 66 major singles tournaments; Djokovic with an all-time record 24 titles, Nadal with 22 and Federer with 20. They have been ranked as world No. 1s in singles for a total 947 weeks (equivalent to 18 years); Djokovic for a record 428 weeks, Federer for 310, and Nadal for 209.

Greatest female players
Further information: World number 1 women tennis players and List of WTA number 1 ranked players
As with the men there are frequent discussions about who is the greatest female singles player of all time with Steffi Graf, Martina Navratilova and Serena Williams being the three players most often nominated.

In March 2012 the Tennis Channel published a combined list of the 100 greatest men and women tennis players of all time.[141] It ranked Steffi Graf as the greatest female player (in 3rd place overall), followed by Martina Navratilova (4th place) and Margaret Court (8th place). The rankings were determined by an international panel.

Sportswriter John Wertheim of Sports Illustrated stated in an article in July 2010 that Serena Williams is the greatest female tennis player ever with the argument that "Head-to-head, on a neutral surface (i.e. hard courts), everyone at their best, I can't help feeling that she crushes the other legends.".[142] In a reaction to this article Yahoo sports blog Busted Racket published a list of the top-10 women's tennis players of all time placing Martina Navratilova in first spot.[143] This top-10 list was similar to the one published in June 2008 by the Bleacher Report who also ranked Martina Navratilova as the top female player of all time.[144]

Steffi Graf is considered by some to be the greatest female player. Billie Jean King said in 1999, "Steffi is definitely the greatest women's tennis player of all time."[145] Martina Navratilova has included Graf on her list of great players.[145] In December 1999, Graf was named the greatest female tennis player of the 20th century by a panel of experts assembled by the Associated Press.[146] Tennis writer Steve Flink, in his book The Greatest Tennis Matches of the Twentieth Century, named her as the best female player of the 20th century, directly followed by Martina Navratilova.[147]

Tennis magazine selected Martina Navratilova as the greatest female tennis player for the years 1965 through 2005.[148][149] Tennis historian and journalist Bud Collins has called Navratilova "arguably, the greatest player of all time."[150] Billie Jean King said about Navratilova in 2006, "She's the greatest singles, doubles and mixed doubles player who's ever lived."[151]

In 2018, a Tennis.com panel selected Serena Williams as the greatest female tennis player in the Open Era.[152] In May 2020, the Tennis Channel ranked Williams as the greatest female tennis player of all time.[153]

In November 2018, Tennis.com polled its readers to choose the greatest women's tennis player of all time and Graf came in first.[154] In July 2020, The Guardian polled its readers to determine the greatest female tennis player of the past 50 years, and Graf was the clear favorite, picking up nearly twice as many votes as any other player.[155]

Officials
Main article: Official (tennis)

An umpire informing two players of the rules.
In most professional play and some amateur competition, there is an officiating head judge or chair umpire (usually referred to simply as the umpire), who sits in a raised chair to one side of the court. The umpire has absolute authority to make factual determinations. The umpire may be assisted by line judges, who determine whether the ball has landed within the required part of the court and who also call foot faults. There also may be a net judge who determines whether the ball has touched the net during service. The umpire has the right to overrule a line judge or a net judge if the umpire is sure that a clear mistake has been made.[156]

In past tournaments, line judges tasked with calling the serve were sometimes assisted by electronic sensors that beeped to indicate an out-of-bounds serve; one such system was called "Cyclops".[157] Cyclops has since largely been replaced by the Hawk-Eye system.[158][159] In professional tournaments using this system, players are allowed three unsuccessful appeals per set, plus one additional appeal in the tiebreak to challenge close line calls by means of an electronic review. The US Open, Miami Masters, US Open Series, and World Team Tennis started using this challenge system in 2006 and the Australian Open and Wimbledon introduced the system in 2007.[160] In clay-court matches, such as at the French Open, a call may be questioned by reference to the mark left by the ball's impact on the court surface.

The referee, who is usually located off the court, is the final authority about tennis rules. When called to the court by a player or team captain, the referee may overrule the umpire's decision if the tennis rules were violated (question of law) but may not change the umpire's decision on a question of fact. If, however, the referee is on the court during play, the referee may overrule the umpire's decision. (This would only happen in Davis Cup or Fed Cup matches, not at the World Group level, when a chair umpire from a non-neutral country is in the chair.)[156]

Junior tennis
Main article: Junior tennis
In tennis, a junior is a player under 18 who is still legally protected by a parent or guardian. Players on the main adult tour who are under 18 must have documents signed by a parent or guardian. These players, however, are still eligible to play in junior tournaments.

The International Tennis Federation (ITF) conducts a junior tour that allows juniors to establish a world ranking and an Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) or Women's Tennis Association (WTA) ranking. Most juniors who enter the international circuit do so by progressing through ITF, Satellite, Future, and Challenger tournaments before entering the main circuit. The latter three circuits also have adults competing in them. Some juniors, however, such as Australian Lleyton Hewitt and Frenchman Gaël Monfils, have catapulted directly from the junior tour to the ATP tour by dominating the junior scene or by taking advantage of opportunities given to them to participate in professional tournaments.

In 2004, the ITF implemented a new rankings scheme to encourage greater participation in doubles, by combining two rankings (singles and doubles) into one combined tally.[161] Junior tournaments do not offer prize money except for the Grand Slam tournaments, which are the most prestigious junior events. Juniors may earn income from tennis by participating in the Future, Satellite, or Challenger tours. Tournaments are broken up into different tiers offering different amounts of ranking points, culminating with Grade A.

Leading juniors are allowed to participate for their nation in the Junior Fed Cup and Davis Cup competitions. To succeed in tennis often means having to begin playing at a young age. To facilitate and nurture a junior's growth in tennis, almost all tennis playing nations have developed a junior development system. Juniors develop their play through a range of tournaments on all surfaces, accommodating all different standards of play. Talented juniors may also receive sponsorships from governing bodies or private institutions.

Injuries
Main article: Tennis injuries
Muscle strain is one of the most common injuries in tennis.[162] When an isolated large-energy appears during the muscle contraction and at the same time body weight apply huge amount of pressure to the lengthened muscle, muscle strain can occur.[163] Inflammation and bleeding are triggered when muscle strain occurs, which can result in redness, pain and swelling.[163] Overuse is also common in tennis players of all levels. Muscle, cartilage, nerves, bursae, ligaments and tendons may be damaged from overuse. The repetitive use of a particular muscle without time for repair and recovery is the most common cause of injury.[163]

In popular culture
"Tennis balles" are mentioned by William Shakespeare in his play Henry V (1599), when a basket of them is given to King Henry as a mockery of his youth and playfulness.
David Foster Wallace, an amateur tennis player himself at Urbana High School in Illinois,[164] included tennis in many of his works of non-fiction and fiction including "Tennis Player Michael Joyce's Professional Artistry as a Paradigm of Certain Stuff about Choice, Freedom, Discipline, Joy, Grotesquerie, and Human Completeness", the autobiographical piece "Derivative Sport in Tornado Alley", and Infinite Jest, which is partially set at the fictional "Enfield Tennis Academy" in Massachusetts.
Japanese manga series The Prince of Tennis revolves around the tennis prodigy Echizen Ryoma and tennis matches between rival schools.
The Royal Tenenbaums (2001) is a film that features Richie Tenenbaum (Luke Wilson), a tennis pro who suffers from depression and has a breakdown on court in front of thousands of fans.[165]
Wimbledon (2004) is a film about a discouraged pro tennis player (Paul Bettany) who meets a young woman on the women's tennis circuit (Kirsten Dunst) who helps him find his drive to go and win Wimbledon.[166]
In The Squid and the Whale (2005), Joan (Laura Linney) has an affair with her kids' tennis coach, Ivan (William Baldwin). In a symbolic scene, Joan's ex-husband, Bernard (Jeff Daniels), loses a tennis match against Ivan in front of the kids.[167]
Woody Allen's Match Point (2005) features a love affair between a former tennis pro, Chris Wilton (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), and his best friend's fiancé, Nola Rice (Scarlett Johansson). A scene of the movie includes a brief comparison between Andre Agassi and Tim Henman, with Chris Wilton calling both of them "geniuses".[168]
Confetti (2006) is a mockumentary which sees three couples competing to win the title of "Most Original Wedding of the Year". One competing couple (Meredith MacNeill and Stephen Mangan) are a pair of hyper-competitive professional tennis players holding a tennis-themed wedding.[169]
There are several tennis video games including the Mario Tennis series, the TopSpin series, the Virtua Tennis series, Sega Superstars Tennis, Grand Slam Tennis and Wii Sports.[170][171]
Challengers, a 2024 film by director Luca Guadagnino, centers around a trio of tennis players, and their relationship with one another, romantic and otherwise. It was nominated four times at the 82nd Golden Globe Awards, where it won Best Original Score.[172]
See also
Portals:
icon Tennis
 Sports
icon Games
American handball
Outline of tennis
Tennis games
Tennis strategy
Tennis technology
Tennis statistics
Tennis injuries
International Tennis Integrity Agency
References
 "Tennis Rules: How To Play Tennis | Rules of Sport". www.rulesofsport.com. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "Tennis Rules". Pro Tennis Tips. 15 March 2015. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "Tennis | Rules, History, Prominent Players, & Facts | Britannica". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 13 March 2023.
 William J. Baker (1988). "Sports in the Western World". p. 182. University of Illinois Press,
 "Tennis | Rules, History, Prominent Players, & Facts | Britannica". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "leg drive on the serve". Intuitive Tennis – Online Tennis Lessons, Video, and Blog. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 Macdonald, Geoff (28 August 2011). "How the Serve Went Over the Top". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "Tennis 360: tiebreaks explained". Tennis Australia. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 Maine, D'Arcy (25 May 2021). "US Open to use Hawk-Eye line-calling technology on all tennis courts for first time". ESPN. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "Hawkeye Tennis Line-Calling System". www.topendsports.com. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "PARTICIPATION INCREASES AS ITF PUBLISHES GLOBAL TENNIS REPORT 2021". ITF. 16 August 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "Grand Slam Tournaments". ITF. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 Gillmeister, Heiner (1998). Tennis : A Cultural History. Washington Square, N.Y.: New York University Press. p. 117. ISBN 0-8147-3121-X.
 Newman, Paul B. (2001). Daily life in the Middle Ages. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-7864-0897-9.
 Gillmeister, Heiner (1998). Tennis : A Cultural History (Repr. ed.). London: Leicester University Press. pp. 17–21. ISBN 978-0-7185-0195-2.
 John Moyer Heathcote; C. G. Heathcote; Edward Oliver Pleydell-Bouverie; Arthur Campbell Ainger (1901). Tennis. Longmans, Green, and co. p. 14.
 "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. 10 June 1927. Retrieved 15 May 2013.
 Crego, Robert. Sports and Games of the 18th and 19th Centuries, page 115 (2003).
 John Astley (1885), The Monumental Inscriptions in the Parish Church of S. Michael, Coventry, together with drawings of all the arms found therein, p. 21, Wikidata Q98360469
 J. Perris (2000) Grass tennis courts: how to construct and maintain them p.8. STRI, 2000
 Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Radio National Ockham's Razor, first broadcast 6 June 2010.
 Tyzack, Anna, The True Home of Tennis Archived 30 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine Country Life, 22 June 2005
 "The Harry Gem Project". theharrygemproject.co.uk. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "Leamington Tennis Club". Archived from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 18 March 2008.
 "Leamington Tennis Court Club". Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2018.
 E. M. Halliday. "Sphairistiké, Anyone?". American Heritage. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 Major Walter Clopton Wingfield International Tennis Hall of Fame. Retrieved 24 September 2011
 "125 years of Wimbledon: From birth of lawn tennis to modern marvels" Archived 18 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine. CNN. Retrieved 21 September 2011
 [Tennis: A Cultural History by Heiner Gillmeister]
 Grimsley, Will (1971). Tennis: Its History, People and Events. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. p. 9. ISBN 0-13-903377-7.
 "Lawn-Tennis on Staten Island" (PDF). The New York Times. 4 September 1880. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 [Heiner Gillmeister Tennis: A Cultural History]
 "History of United States Tennis Association". Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 "Fact & History". Rhodes Island Government. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 "History of the U.S. National Championships/US Open". USOpen.org. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "History of the French Open". Archived from the original on 26 May 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 "History of Tennis". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 22 March 2010. Retrieved 28 July 2008.
 "Australian Open Stats | History". 9 January 2021.
 "Grand Slam Major Championships | Tennis". 4 February 2021.
 Bensen, Clark (2013–2014). "The World Championships of 1913 to 1923: the Forgotten Majors" (PDF). tenniscollectors.org. Newport, Rhode Island, United States: Journal of The Tennis Collectors of America. p. 470. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2018. Number 30
 "Tennis Federation Bans World Titles", The New York Times, 17 March 1923, p. 10
 "ITF: History". ITF Tennis. London, United Kingdom: International Tennis Federation. 2018. Archived from the original on 13 July 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2018.
 "James Henry Van Alen in the Tennis Hall of Fame". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 "Olympic Tennis Event". ITF. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "The Tennis and Olympics Love Affair". SportsPundit.com. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "Davis Cup History". ITF. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "Fed Cup History". ITF. Archived from the original on 2 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "History of the Pro Tennis Wars Chapter 2, part 1 1927–1928". Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 Open Minded Archived 31 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine – Bruce Goldman
 "1968, Open era: The moment tennis opted to become a modern sport". Tennis Majors. 8 May 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 Henderson, Jon (10 December 2008). "Middle-class heroes can lift our game". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2 August 2008.
 Kate Magee (10 July 2008). "Max Clifford to help shed tennis' middle-class image". PR Week. Retrieved 2 August 2008.
 "International Tennis Hall of Fame Information". Archived from the original on 18 May 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 "International Tennis Hall of Fame". www.tennisfame.com. Retrieved 25 November 2021.
 "ITF Tennis – Technical – Appendix II". ITF. Archived from the original on 13 April 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2012.
 "ITF Tennis – Technical – The Racket". ITF. Archived from the original on 26 June 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2012.
 "What are the most popular tennis racket brands". Retrieved 17 January 2021.
 "Types of Tennis Strings | A Comprehensive Guide". tenniscompanion.org. 15 January 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2021.
 "Natural Gut Strings – The Best Tennis Strings Available?". Perfect Tennis. 6 August 2019. Retrieved 23 November 2021.
 "Pros and cons of polyester tennis strings". www.tennis-warehouse.com. Retrieved 23 November 2021.
 "Ultimate Guide to Kevlar Strings". The Tennis Bros. Retrieved 23 November 2021.
 "Hybrid Stringing – Roger Federer's Stringing Method of Choice". Perfect Tennis. 17 August 2019.
 Grimsley, Will (1971). Tennis: Its History, People and Events: Styles of the Greats. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. p. 14. ISBN 0-13-903377-7.
 "History of Rule 3 – The Ball". ITF. Archived from the original on 6 November 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2012.
 "Balls- Manufacture". ITF. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2014.
 "ITF Rules of Tennis" (PDF). International Tennis Federation. Retrieved 7 November 2022.
 "Tennis court dimensions". Sportsknowhow.com. Archived from the original on 10 June 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 "Tennis court history – Grass". ITF. Archived from the original on 30 June 2008. Retrieved 28 July 2008.
 "Surface Descriptions". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2015.
 "ITF Rules of Tennis – Rule 1 (The Court)" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "ITF Rules of Tennis – Rule 17 (Serving)" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 "Tennis Terminology". cbs.com. Retrieved 31 December 2011.
 "Basic rules of tennis".
 "Scientists say ABBA sequence would make for fairer penalty shootouts in soccer". UPI. 28 July 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2021.
 "ATP Most Jam Donuts Served". Tennis.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 From 1984 through 1998, women played first-to-win-three-sets in the final of the year-ending WTA Tour Championships.
 "WTT Firsts & Innovations". WTT.com. Archived from the original on 25 February 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 "Alternative Procedures and Scoring Methods". ITF. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 "2017 Australian Ranking Tournaments – FAST4 scoring format" (PDF). Tennis Australia. March 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
 "Fast4 Tennis: What is it, what are the rules and how is it played?". Fox Sports. 11 January 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
 "The ITF states this in Rule No. 29" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 September 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2008.
 "Code of Conduct for 2012 ITF Pro Circuits Tournaments" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2012. The first violation of this Section shall be penalised by a Time Violation warning and each subsequent violation shall be penalised by the assessment of one Time Violation point penalty.
 "Tennis On-Court Coaching". Expert-tennis-tips.com.
 "Coaching during a match". USTA. Archived from the original on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 7 May 2012.
 "Tennis Coaching Debate". NPR.org. NPR. Retrieved 7 May 2012.
 "Does on-court coaching have a future?". ESPN. 10 October 2006. Retrieved 7 May 2012.
 WTA 2012 Official Rulebook Archived 10 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine Chapter XVII/H
 "Tennis Stances". Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019.
 "Tennis Techniques for Beginners". Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019.
 "Tennis Footwork: Different Hitting Stances Explained". 27 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019.
 "Grip Guide — A Grip on Your Game". Tennis.com. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 "Chang refused to lose 20 years ago". ESPN. 19 May 2009. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Serves". BBC. 12 September 2005. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "The Two-handed Forehand Revisited". TennisONE. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 Damir Popadic. "Two-Handed is Superior to One-Handed Backhand" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 Grasso, John (2011). Historical Dictionary of Tennis. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-8108-7237-0.
 "Lawn Tennis Association Deaf tennis". Archived from the original on 5 February 2008. Retrieved 16 March 2008.
 "Grand Slams Overview". ITF. Archived from the original on 9 July 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "ATP Rankings FAQ". ATP. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "WTA Tour Rankings" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2008. Retrieved 16 March 2008.
 Sarah Holt (15 June 2005). "What not to wear at Wimbledon". BBC Sport. Retrieved 16 March 2008.
 "10 Ways to Grab a Seat at Wimbledon 2010". Wimbledondebentureholders.com. Archived from the original on 15 June 2010. Retrieved 24 May 2010.
 "History of Tennis". Archived from the original on 22 March 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2008.
 "ATP Finals move to Turin from 2021 signals the end of an era". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 January 2024.
 "ATP Tour 2009". Coretennis.net. Retrieved 24 May 2010.
 "ATP World Tour Season". ATP. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "Dubai Duty Free Tennis Championships". ATP. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "About the Challenger Circuit". Association of Tennis Professionals. Archived from the original on 27 February 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
 "An appreciation of Andre Agassi". ESPN, Matt Wilansky. 1 July 2006. Retrieved 18 March 2008.
 "About the ITF Men's Circuit". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 18 March 2008.
 "WTA unveils comprehensive rebrand". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 24 November 2021.
 "WTA 1000 roundtable: Most impressive winners, top matches and best quotes". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 24 November 2021.
 "Tournaments | WTA Official". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 24 November 2021.
 "Women's tennis battles 'grunt work'". ESPN.com. 27 June 2012. Retrieved 24 July 2021.
 Rubinstein, Julian (30 January 2000). "Being John McEnroe". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2018.
 "John McEnroe". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 28 October 2013.
 Cronin, Matthew (10 March 2011). Epic: John McEnroe, Bjorn Borg, and the Greatest Tennis Season Ever. Wiley. p. 144. ISBN 978-1-118-01595-7.
 "Doubles specialists face unusual pressure, atmosphere in Olympic tennis". Tennis.com.
 "Woodbridge: Doubles 'specialists' or tennis players?". Tennismash. 14 March 2017.
 "Raymond Is Taking Issue With a Doubles Standard". Los Angeles Times. 6 August 2000.
 "Wimbledon Prize Money". Associated Press. Retrieved 29 June 2011.[permanent dead link]
 "2018 US Open Prize Money". United States Tennis Association. Retrieved 29 August 2018.
 "ESPN.com: Tilden brought theatrics to tennis". www.espn.com.
 "Don Budge's Comments After 1937 Davis Cup Semi-final Match Against Baron Gottfried von Cramm (1:07)". Archived from the original on 26 April 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 Kramer, Jack; Deford, Frank (1979). The Game, My 40 Years in Tennis. Putnam. ISBN 0-399-12336-9.
 Richard Pagliaro (26 February 2004). "The Tennis Week Interview: Tony Trabert Part II". Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.
 Will Grimsley, Tennis: Its History, People, and Events (1971)
 "Hoad" (PDF). Jame Buddell. Archived from the original on 25 June 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2012.
 Sclink, Leo (20 January 2012). "Rod Laver's priceless Grand Slam". Herald Sun. Australia. Retrieved 5 September 2018.
 Bercow, John (2014). "Chapter 9: Rod Laver". Tennis Maestros: The Twenty Greatest Male Tennis Players of All Time. London, England: Biteback Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84954-765-9.
 "How Borg, Connors, Gerulaitis & McEnroe stirred masses and moved poets".
 "Street-fighter recalls battles of old". 27 June 2004.
 Dwyre, Bill (14 March 1995). "Sampras, Agassi Have Just Begun to Fight". The Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 15 May 2010.
 Molinaro, John. "CBC Sports: "Tennis's love affair with Agassi comes to an end"". Cbc.ca. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013.
 "Reed's shotmakers: Men's return of serve". Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved 15 May 2010.
 "Adjectives Tangled in the Net". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 May 2010.
 Parsons, John (26 June 2002). "Grand-slammed". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Stars pay tribute to Agassi". BBC Sport. 4 September 2006. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 Eccleshare, Charlie (27 August 2018). "Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic head to US Open with 'Big Three' more dominant than ever". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2020.
 Chase, Chris (21 August 2018). "Federer, Nadal and Djokovic: Ranking the Big Three rivalries". USA Today. Retrieved 19 February 2020.
 "100 Greatest of All Time". The Tennis Channel. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 Wertheim, John (7 July 2010). "I said it: Serena Williams is game's greatest ever". SI.com. Archived from the original on 24 August 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 "Ranking the top-10 women's tennis players of all time". Yahoo Sports. Yahoo. Retrieved 3 May 2012.[permanent dead link]
 "Greatest Ever: Tennis: The Top Ten Female Players of All Time". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 Finn, Robin (18 August 1999). "On Tennis; Graf Is Best, Right? Just Don't Ask Her". The New York Times. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 Wilstein, Steve (7 December 1999). "Tennis Players of the Century". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 "Exclusive Interview with Steve Flink about the career of Chris Evert". Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 "40 Greatest Players of the Tennis Era". Tennis. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2012.
 "Redemption Has to Start Somewhere". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
 Collins, Bud (2008). The Bud Collins History of Tennis: An Authoritative Encyclopedia and Record Book. New York, N.Y.: New Chapter Press. p. 600. ISBN 978-0-942257-41-0.
 Bonnie DeSimone (11 September 2006). "Act II of Navratilova's career ends with a win". ESPN. Retrieved 4 May 2012.
 Tignor, Steve (2 March 2018). "The 50 Greatest Players of the Open Era (W): No. 1, Serena Williams". Tennis.com. Retrieved 17 June 2021.
 Prakash (18 May 2020). "Serena Williams Ranked as the Greatest of All Time". Tennis World USA. Retrieved 17 June 2021.
 "GOAT Vote: Steffi or Serena? 'The Ten' went one way; you went another". Tennis.com.
 "The greatest female tennis player of the last 50 years: The fans' verdict". TheGuardian.com. 4 July 2020.
 "ITF Rules of Tennis – Appendix V (Role of Court Officials)" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2012.
 "Cyclops and speed guns". BBC. 20 June 2003. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Cyclops knocked off centre as Wimbledon adopts Hawkeye". The Guardian. London. 24 April 2007. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 Evans, Richard (27 June 2009). "Hawk-eye Vision". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "The History Of Hawk-Eye". WTA Tour. 7 October 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2012.
 "ITF Announce Combined Junior Rankings" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2004. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 Abrams, Geoffrey D.; Renstrom, Per A.; Safran, Marc R. (1 June 2012). "Epidemiology of musculoskeletal injury in the tennis player". British Journal of Sports Medicine. 46 (7): 492–498. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2012-091164. ISSN 1473-0480. PMID 22554841. S2CID 10416294.
 Levangie, P. K., & Norkin, C. C. (2011). Joint structure and function: A comprehensive analysis (5th ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis Co. ISBN 9780803623620.
 "Brief Interview with a Five Draft Man". Amherst Magazine. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011. Retrieved 28 June 2009.
 "The Royal Tenenbaums". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Wimbledon". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "The Squid and the Whale". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Match Point". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Confetti". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Topspin 4 Official Website". 2K Sports. Archived from the original on 5 May 2012. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
 "Mario Tennis official website". Nintendo. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012. Retrieved 7 May 2012.
 BBFC. "Challengers". www.bbfc.co.uk. Retrieved 20 March 2025.
Further reading
Barrett, John. Wimbledon: The Official History of the Championships (HarperCollins, 2001) ISBN 978-0-00-711707-9
Collins, Bud. History of Tennis – An Authoritative Encyclopedia and Record Book (New Chapter Press, 2010) ISBN 978-0-942257-70-0
Danzig, Allison and Peter Schwed (ed.). The Fireside Book of Tennis (Simon & Schuster, 1972) ISBN 978-0-671-21128-8
Doherty, Reginald Frank. R.F. and H.L. Doherty – On Lawn Tennis (Kessinger Publishing, 2010) ISBN 978-1-167-08589-5
Dwight, Eleanor. Tie Breaker – Jimmy Van Alen and Tennis in the 20th century (Scala Books, 2010) ISBN 978-1-905377-40-4
Gillmeister, Heiner. Tennis: A Cultural History (Continuum, 1998) ISBN 978-0-7185-0195-2
Grimsley, Will. Tennis – Its History, People and Events (Prentice-Hall, 1971) ISBN 0-13-903377-7
King, Billie Jean and Starr, Cynthia. We Have Come a Long Way (McGraw-Hill, 1998) ISBN 0-07-034625-9
Whitman, Malcolm D. Tennis – Origins and Mysteries (Dover Publications, 2004) ISBN 0-486-43357-9
External links
Tennis
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
International Tennis Federation (ITF)
Association of Tennis Players (ATP) – men's professional tennis organization
Women's Tennis Association (WTA) – women's professional tennis organization
International Tennis Hall of Fame
Grand Slam history (Reference book)


vte
Tennis
vte
World Top 10 tennis players as of 26 May 2025
vte
Tennis records and statistics
vte
 Summer Olympic sports
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: TennisBall gamesSummer Olympic sportsRacket sportsSports originating in EnglandAthletic sportsTurf sports
This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 18:15 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Tennis

163 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Etymology
History

Type

Zoo population management

Justification

Roadside zoos
Animal welfare in zoos

Moral criticism

Regulation

See also
Notes
Further reading
External links
Zoo

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Zoo (disambiguation).

Sea lion and keeper at the Welsh Mountain Zoo
A zoo (short for zoological garden; also called an animal park or menagerie) is a facility in which animals are kept within enclosures for public exhibition and often bred for conservation purposes.[1]

The term zoological garden refers to zoology, the study of animals. The term is derived from the Ancient Greek ζῷον, zōion, 'animal', and the suffix -λογία, -logia, 'study of'. The abbreviation zoo was first used of the London Zoological Gardens, which was opened for scientific study in 1828, and to the public in 1847.[2] The first modern zoo was the Tierpark Hagenbeck by Carl Hagenbeck in Germany. In the United States alone, zoos are visited by over 181 million people annually.[3]

Etymology

London Zoo, 1835
The London Zoo, which was opened in 1828, was initially known as the "Gardens and Menagerie of the Zoological Society of London", and it described itself as a menagerie or "zoological forest".[4] The abbreviation "zoo" first appeared in print in the United Kingdom around 1847, when it was used for the Clifton Zoo, but it was not until some 20 years later that the shortened form became popular in the rhyming song "Walking in the Zoo" by music-hall artist Alfred Vance.[4] The term "zoological park" was used for more expansive facilities in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Washington, D.C., and the Bronx in New York, which opened in 1846, 1891 and 1899 respectively.[5]

Relatively new terms for zoos, in the late 20th century are "conservation park" or "bio park". Adopting a new name is a strategy used by some zoo professionals to distance their institutions from the stereotypical and nowadays criticized zoo concept of the 19th century.[6] The term "bio park" was first coined and developed by the National Zoo in Washington D.C. in the late 1980s.[7] In 1993, the New York Zoological Society changed its name to the Wildlife Conservation Society and re branded the zoos under its jurisdiction as "wildlife conservation parks".[8]

History
Royal menageries
Further information: Menagerie

The Tower of London housed England's royal menagerie for several centuries (picture from the 15th century, British Library).
The predecessor of the zoological garden is the menagerie, which has a long history from the ancient world to modern times. The oldest known zoological collection was revealed during excavations at Hierakonpolis, Egypt in 2009, of a c. 3500 BCE menagerie. The exotic animals included hippos, hartebeest, elephants, baboons and wildcats.[9] King Ashur-bel-kala of the Middle Assyrian Empire created zoological and botanical gardens in the 11th century BCE. In the 2nd century BCE, the Chinese Empress Tanki had a "house of deer" built, and King Wen of Zhou kept a 1,500-acre (6.1 km2) zoo called Ling-Yu, or the Garden of Intelligence. Other well-known collectors of animals included King Solomon of the Kingdom of Israel and Judah, Queen Semiramis and King Ashurbanipal of Assyria, and King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia.[10] By the 4th century BCE, zoos existed in most of the Greek city states; Alexander the Great is known to have sent animals that he found on his military expeditions back to Greece. The Roman emperors kept private collections of animals for study or for use in the arena,[10] the latter faring notoriously poorly. The 19th-century historian W. E. H. Lecky wrote of the Roman games, first held in 366 BCE:

At one time, a bear and a bull, chained together, rolled in fierce combat across the sand ... Four hundred bears were killed in a single day under Caligula ... Under Nero, four hundred tigers fought with bulls and elephants. In a single day, at the dedication of the Colosseum by Titus, five thousand animals perished. Under Trajan ... lions, tigers, elephants, rhinoceroses, hippopotami, giraffes, bulls, stags, even crocodiles and serpents were employed to give novelty to the spectacle.[11]

Charlemagne had an elephant named Abul-Abbas that was given to him by the Abbasid caliph.

King Henry I of England kept a collection of animals at his palace in Woodstock which reportedly included lions, leopards, and camels.[12] The most prominent collection in medieval England was in the Tower of London, created as early as 1204 by King John I. Henry III received a wedding gift in 1235 of three leopards from Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, and in 1264, the animals were moved to the Bulwark, renamed the Lion Tower, near the main western entrance of the Tower. It was opened to the public during the reign of Elizabeth I in the 16th century.[13] During the 18th century, the price of admission was three half-pence, or the supply of a cat or dog for feeding to the lions.[12] The animals were moved to the London Zoo when it opened.

Aztec emperor Moctezuma had in his capital city of Tenochtitlan a "house of animals" with a large collection of birds, mammals and reptiles in a garden tended by more than 600 employees. The garden was described by several Spanish conquerors, including Hernán Cortés in 1520. After the Aztec revolt against the Spanish rule, and during the subsequent battle for the city, Cortés reluctantly ordered the zoo to be destroyed.[14]

Enlightenment era

The Versailles menagerie during the reign of Louis XIV in the 17th century
Further information: List of zoos by country
The oldest zoo in the world still in existence is the Tiergarten Schönbrunn in Vienna, Austria. It was constructed by Adrian van Stekhoven in 1752 at the order of Emperor Francis I, to serve as an imperial menagerie as part of Schönbrunn Palace. The menagerie was initially reserved for the viewing pleasure of the imperial family and the court, but was made accessible to the public in 1765.[15] In 1775, a zoo was founded in Madrid, and in 1795, the zoo inside the Jardin des Plantes in Paris was founded by Jacques-Henri Bernardin, with animals from the royal menagerie at Versailles, primarily for scientific research and education. The planning about a space for the conservation and observation of animals was expressed in connection with the political construction of republican citizenship.[16]

The Kazan Zoo, the first zoo in Russia was founded in 1806 by the Professor of Kazan State University Karl Fuchs.

The modern zoo
Until the early 19th century, the function of the zoo was often to symbolize royal power, like King Louis XIV's menagerie at Versailles. Major cities in Europe set up zoos in the 19th century, usually using London and Paris as models. The transition was made from princely menageries designed to entertain high society with strange novelties into public zoological gardens. The new goal was to educate the entire population with information along modern scientific lines. Zoos were supported by local commercial or scientific societies.

British Empire

Annual report of the Zoological Society of London, 1836
The modern zoo that emerged in the 19th century in the United Kingdom,[17] was focused on providing scientific study and later educational exhibits to the public for entertainment and inspiration.[18]

A growing fascination for natural history and zoology, coupled with the tremendous expansion in the urbanization of London, led to a heightened demand for a greater variety of public forms of entertainment to be made available. The need for public entertainment, as well as the requirements of scholarly research, came together in the founding of the first modern zoos. Whipsnade Park Zoo in Bedfordshire, England, opened in 1931. It allowed visitors to drive through the enclosures and come into close proximity with the animals.

The Zoological Society of London was founded in 1826 by Stamford Raffles and established the London Zoo in Regent's Park two years later in 1828.[19] At its founding, it was the world's first scientific zoo.[10][20] Originally intended to be used as a collection for scientific study, it was opened to the public in 1847.[20] The Zoo was located in Regent's Park—then undergoing development at the hands of the architect John Nash. What set the London zoo apart from its predecessors was its focus on society at large. The zoo was established in the middle of a city for the public, and its layout was designed to cater for the large London population. The London zoo was widely copied as the archetype of the public city zoo.[21] In 1853, the Zoo opened the world's first public aquarium.

Dublin Zoo was opened in 1831 by members of the medical profession interested in studying animals while they were alive and more particularly getting hold of them when they were dead.[22]

Downs' Zoological Gardens created by Andrew Downs and opened to the Nova Scotia public in 1847. It was originally intended to be used as a collection for scientific study. By the early 1860s, the zoo grounds covered 40 hectares with many fine flowers and ornamental trees, picnic areas, statues, walking paths, The Glass House (which contained a greenhouse with an aviary, aquarium, and museum of stuffed animals and birds), a pond, a bridge over a waterfall, an artificial lake with a fountain, a wood-ornamented greenhouse, a forest area, and enclosures and buildings.[23][24][25]

The first zoological garden in Australia was Melbourne Zoo in 1860.

Germany

"Wild" horses in the Erlebnispark Tripsdrill wildlife and theme park near Cleebronn in Southern Germany
In German states leading roles came Berlin (1841), Frankfurt (1856), and Hamburg (1863). In 1907, the entrepreneur Carl Hagenbeck founded the Tierpark Hagenbeck in Stellingen, now a quarter of Hamburg. His zoo was a radical departure from the layout of the zoo that had been established in 1828. It was the first zoo to use open enclosures surrounded by moats, rather than barred cages, to better approximate animals' natural environments.[26] He also set up mixed-species exhibits and based the layout on the different organizing principle of geography, as opposed to taxonomy.[27]

Poland

Bear in Silesian Zoological Garden in Chorzów, Poland

The largest tank of the Afrykarium in the Wrocław Zoo shows the depths of the Mozambique Channel, where sharks, rays, and other large pelagic fish can be viewed from this 18 meter long underwater acrylic tunnel
The Wrocław Zoo (Polish: Ogród Zoologiczny we Wrocławiu) is the oldest zoo in Poland, opened in 1865 when the city was part of Prussia, and was home to about 10,500 animals representing about 1,132 species (in terms of the number of animal species, it is the third largest in the world[28]). In 2014 the Wrocław Zoo opened the Africarium, the only themed oceanarium devoted solely to exhibiting the fauna of Africa, comprehensively presenting selected ecosystems from the continent of Africa. Housing over 10 thousand animals, the facility's breadth extends from housing insects such cockroaches to large mammals like elephants on an area of over 33 hectares.[29]

United States
See also: Barnum's American Museum
In the United States, the Philadelphia Zoo, opened on July 1, 1874, earning its motto "America's First Zoo." The Lincoln Park Zoological Gardens in Chicago and the Cincinnati Zoo opened in 1875. In the 1930s, federal relief programs provided financial aid to most local zoos. The Works Progress Administration and similar New Deal government agencies helped greatly in the construction, renovation, and expansion of zoos when the Great Depression severely reduced local budgets. It was "a new deal for animals."[30]

The Atlanta Zoo, founded in 1886, suffered neglect. By 1984 it was ranked among the ten worst zoos in the United States. Systematic reform by 2000 put it on the list of the ten best.[31]

By 2020, the United States featured 230 accredited zoos and aquariums across 45 states, accommodating 800,000 animals, and 6,000 species out of which about 1,000 are endangered. The zoos provide 208,000 jobs, and with an annual budget of $230 million for wildlife conservation. They attract over 200 million visits a year and have special programs for schools. They are organized by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums.[32][33]

Japan
Japan's first modern zoo, Tokyo's Ueno Imperial Zoological Gardens, opened in 1882 based on European models. In World War II it was used to teach the Japanese people about the lands recently conquered by the Army. In 1943, fearing American bombing attacks, the government ordered the zoo to euthanize dangerous animals that might escape.[34][35]

Environmentalism

A Siberian tiger (Panthera tigris altaica) at Korkeasaari Zoo in Helsinki, Finland
When ecology emerged as a matter of public interest in the 1970s, a few zoos began to consider making conservation their central role, with Gerald Durrell of the Jersey Zoo, George Rabb of Brookfield Zoo, and William Conway of the Bronx Zoo (Wildlife Conservation Society) leading the discussion. From then on, zoo professionals became increasingly aware of the need to engage themselves in conservation programs, and the American Zoo Association soon said that conservation was its highest priority.[36] In order to stress conservation issues, many large zoos stopped the practice of having animals perform tricks for visitors. The Detroit Zoo, for example, stopped its elephant show in 1969, and its chimpanzee show in 1983, acknowledging that the trainers had probably abused the animals to get them to perform.[37]

Mass destruction of wildlife habitat has yet to cease all over the world and many species such as elephants, big cats, penguins, tropical birds, primates, rhinos, exotic reptiles, and many others are in danger of dying out. Many of today's zoos hope to stop or slow the decline of many endangered species and see their primary purpose as breeding endangered species in captivity and reintroducing them into the wild. Modern zoos also aim to help teach visitors the importance of animal conservation, often through letting visitors witness the animals firsthand.[38] Some critics, and the majority of animal rights activists, say that zoos, no matter their intentions, or how noble these intentions, are immoral and serve as nothing but to fulfill human leisure at the expense of the animals (an opinion that has spread over the years). However, zoo advocates argue that their efforts make a difference in wildlife conservation and education.[38]

Human exhibits

Ota Benga, who was featured as a human exhibit in New York, 1906
Further information: Human zoo, Scientific racism, and Social Darwinism
Humans were occasionally displayed in cages at zoos along with non-human animals, to illustrate the differences between people of European and non-European origin. In September 1906, William Hornaday, director of the Bronx Zoo in New York—with the agreement of Madison Grant, head of the New York Zoological Society—had Ota Benga, a Congolese pygmy, displayed in a cage with the chimpanzees, then with an orangutan named Dohong, and a parrot. The exhibit was intended as an example of the "missing link" between the orangutan and white man. It triggered protests from the city's clergymen, but the public reportedly flocked to see Benga.[39][40]

Humans were also displayed at various events, especially colonial expositions such as the 1931 Paris Colonial Exposition, with the practice continuing in Belgium at least to as late as 1958 in a "Congolese village" display at Expo '58 in Brussels. These displays, while sometimes called "human zoos", usually did not take place in zoos or use cages.[41]

Type
Further information: List of zoos by country and Immersion exhibit

Monkey islands, São Paulo Zoo
Zoo animals live in enclosures that often attempt to replicate their natural habitats or behavioral patterns, for the benefit of both the animals and visitors. Nocturnal animals are often housed in buildings with a reversed light-dark cycle, i.e. only dim white or red lights are on during the day so the animals are active during visitor hours, and brighter lights on at night when the animals sleep. Special climate conditions may be created for animals living in extreme environments, such as penguins. Special enclosures for birds, mammals, insects, reptiles, fish, and other aquatic life forms have also been developed. Some zoos have walk-through exhibits where visitors enter enclosures of non-aggressive species, such as lemurs, marmosets, birds, lizards, and turtles. Visitors are asked to keep to paths and avoid showing or eating foods that the animals might snatch.

Safari park
Main article: Safari park

Giraffes in the West Midlands Safari Park
Some zoos keep animals in larger, outdoor enclosures, confining them with moats and fences, rather than in cages. Safari parks, also known as zoo parks and lion farms, allow visitors to drive through them and come in close proximity to the animals.[10] Sometimes, visitors are able to feed animals through the car windows.

The first safari park was Whipsnade Park in Bedfordshire, England, opened by the Zoological Society of London in 1931 which today (2014) covers 600 acres (2.4 km2). Since the early 1970s, an 1,800 acre (7 km2) park in the San Pasqual Valley near San Diego has featured the San Diego Zoo Safari Park, run by the Zoological Society of San Diego. One of two state-supported zoo parks in North Carolina is the 2,000-acre (8.1 km2) North Carolina Zoo in Asheboro.[42] The 500-acre (2.0 km2) Werribee Open Range Zoo in Melbourne, Australia, displays animals living in an artificial savannah.

Aquaria
Further information: Public aquarium

Sea lions at the Melbourne Zoo
The first public aquarium was opened at the London Zoo in 1853. This was followed by the opening of public aquaria in continental Europe (e.g. Paris in 1859, Hamburg in 1864, Berlin in 1869, and Brighton in 1872) and the United States (e.g. Boston in 1859, Washington in 1873, San Francisco Woodward's Garden in 1873, and the New York Aquarium at Battery Park in 1896).

Roadside zoos
Roadside zoos are found throughout North America, particularly in remote locations. They are often small, for-profit zoos, often intended to attract visitors to some other facility, such as a gas station. The animals may be trained to perform tricks, and visitors are able to get closer to them than in larger zoos.[43] Since they are sometimes less regulated, roadside zoos are often subject to accusations of neglect[44] and cruelty.[45]

In June 2014 the Animal Legal Defense Fund filed a lawsuit against the Iowa-based roadside Cricket Hollow Zoo for violating the Endangered Species Act by failing to provide proper care for its animals.[46] Since filing the lawsuit, ALDF has obtained records from investigations conducted by the USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services; these records show that the zoo is also violating the Animal Welfare Act.[47]

Petting zoos
Main article: Petting zoo

Petting farm in Berlin Zoological Garden
A petting zoo, also called petting farms or children's zoos, features a combination of domestic animals and wild species that are docile enough to touch and feed. To ensure the animals' health, the food is supplied by the zoo, either from vending machines or a kiosk nearby.

Animal theme parks
Main article: Animal theme park
An animal theme park is a combination of an amusement park and a zoo, mainly for entertaining and commercial purposes. Marine mammal parks such as Sea World and Marineland are more elaborate dolphinariums keeping whales, and containing additional entertainment attractions. Another kind of animal theme park contains more entertainment and amusement elements than the classical zoo, such as stage shows, roller coasters, and mythical creatures. Some examples are Busch Gardens Tampa Bay in Tampa, Florida, both Disney's Animal Kingdom and Gatorland in Orlando, Florida, Flamingo Land in North Yorkshire, England, and Six Flags Discovery Kingdom in Vallejo, California.

Zoo population management
Sources of animals
By 2000 most animals being displayed in zoos were the offspring of other zoo animals.[citation needed] This trend, however was and still is somewhat species-specific. When animals are transferred between zoos, they usually spend time in quarantine, and are given time to acclimatize to their new enclosures which are often designed to mimic their natural environment. For example, some species of penguins may require refrigerated enclosures. Guidelines on necessary care for such animals is published in the International Zoo Yearbook.[48] Animal exchanges between facilities are usually made voluntarily, based on a model of cooperation for conservation. Loaned animals usually remain the property of the original park, and any offspring yielded by loaned animals are usually divided between the lending and holding institutions. For decades the capture of wild animals or purchasing of animals has been broadly considered unethical and has not been practiced by reputable zoos.

Space constraints and surplus animals

Rhinoceros unicornis found in Tiergarten Schönbrunn, Vienna
Especially in large animals, a limited number of spaces are available in zoos. As a consequence, various management tools are used to preserve the space for the genetically most important individuals and to reduce the risk of inbreeding. Management of animal populations is typically through international organizations such as AZA and EAZA.[49] Zoos have several different ways of managing the animal populations, such as moves between zoos, contraception, sale of excess animals and euthanization (culling).[50]

Contraception can be an effective way to limit a population's breeding. However it may also have health repercussions and can be difficult or even impossible to reverse in some animals.[51] Additionally, some species may lose their reproductive capability entirely if prevented from breeding for a period (whether through contraceptives or isolation), but further study is needed on the subject.[49] Sale of surplus animals from zoos was once common and in some cases animals have ended up in substandard facilities. In recent decades the practice of selling animals from certified zoos has declined.[50] A large number of animals are culled each year in zoos, but this is controversial.[52] A highly publicized culling as part of population management was that of a healthy giraffe at Copenhagen Zoo in 2014. The zoo argued that his genes already were well-represented in captivity, making the giraffe unsuitable for future breeding. There were offers to adopt him and an online petition to save him had many thousand signatories, but the culling proceeded.[53] Although zoos in some countries have been open about culling, the controversy of the subject and pressure from the public has resulted in others being closed.[50] This stands in contrast to most zoos publicly announcing animal births.[50] Furthermore, while many zoos are willing to cull smaller and/or low-profile animals, fewer are willing to do it with larger high-profile species.[50][52]

Breeding and cloning
Many animals breed readily in captivity. Zoos frequently are forced to intentionally limit captive breeding because of a lack of natural wild habitat in which to reintroduce animals.[54] This highlights the importance of in situ conservation, or preservation of natural spaces, in addition to the utility of zoo captive breeding and reintroduction programs. In situ conservation and reintroduction programs are key elements to obtaining certification by reputable organisations such as the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA).[55] Efforts to clone endangered species in the United States, Europe, and Asia are frequently embedded in zoos and zoological parks.[56]

Justification
Conservation and research

The African plains exhibit at North Carolina Zoo illustrates the dimension of an open-range zoo.
The position of most modern zoos in Australasia, Asia, Europe, and North America, particularly those with scientific societies, is that they display wild animals primarily for the conservation of endangered species, as well as for research purposes and education, and secondarily for the entertainment of visitors.[57][58] The Zoological Society of London states in its charter that its aim is "the advancement of Zoology and Animal Physiology and the introduction of new and curious subjects of the Animal Kingdom." It maintains two research institutes, the Nuffield Institute of Comparative Medicine and the Wellcome Institute of Comparative Physiology. In the United States, the Penrose Research Laboratory of the Philadelphia Zoo focuses on the study of comparative pathology.[10] The World Association of Zoos and Aquariums produced its first conservation strategy in 1993, and in November 2004, it adopted a new strategy that sets out the aims and mission of zoological gardens of the 21st century.[59] When studying behaviour of captive animals, several things should however be taken into account before drawing conclusions about wild populations. Including that captive populations are often smaller than wild ones and that the space available to each animal is often less than in the wild.[60]

Conservation programs all over the world fight to protect species from going extinct, but many conservation programs are underfunded and under-represented. Conservation programs can struggle to fight bigger issues like habitat loss and illness. It often takes significant funding and long time periods to rebuild degraded habitats, both of which are scarce in conservation efforts. The current state of conservation programs cannot rely solely in situ (on-site conservation) plans alone, ex situ (off-site conservation) may therefore provide a suitable alternative. Off-site conservation relies on zoos, national parks, or other care facilities to support the rehabilitation of the animals and their populations. Zoos benefit conservation by providing suitable habitats and care to endangered animals. When properly regulated, they present a safe, clean environment for the animals to increase populations sizes. A study on amphibian conservation and zoos addressed these problems by writing,

Whilst addressing in situ threats, particularly habitat loss, degradation and fragmentation, is of primary importance; for many amphibian species in situ conservation alone will not be enough, especially in light of current un-mitigatable threats that can impact populations very rapidly such as chytridiomycosis [an infectious fungal disease]. Ex situ programmes can complement in situ activities in a number of ways including maintaining genetically and demographically viable populations while threats are either better understood or mitigated in the wild[61]

The breeding of endangered species is coordinated by cooperative breeding programmes containing international studbooks and coordinators, who evaluate the roles of individual animals and institutions from a global or regional perspective, and there are regional programmes all over the world for the conservation of endangered species. In Africa, conservation is handled by the African Preservation Program (APP);[62] in the U.S. and Canada by Species Survival Plans;[63] in Australasia, by the Australasian Species Management Program;[64] in Europe, by the European Endangered Species Program;[65] and in Japan, South Asia, and South East Asia, by the Japanese Association of Zoos and Aquariums, the South Asian Zoo Association for Regional Cooperation, and the South East Asian Zoo Association.

Positive impacts on local wildlife

A Guayaquil Squirrel feeding on corn at the Parque de las Leyendas zoo
Besides conservation of captive species, large zoos may form a suitable environment for wild native animals such as herons to live in or visit. A colony of black-crowned night herons has regularly summered at the National Zoo in Washington, D.C. for more than a century.[66] Some zoos may provide information to visitors on wild animals visiting or living in the zoo, or encourage them by directing them to specific feeding or breeding platforms.[67][68]

Roadside zoos
In modern, well-regulated zoos, breeding is controlled to maintain a self-sustaining, global captive population. This is not the case in some less well-regulated zoos, often based in poorer regions. Overall "stock turnover" of animals during a year in a select group of poor zoos was reported as 20%-25% with 75% of wild caught apes dying in captivity within the first 20 months.[69] The authors of the report stated that before successful breeding programs, the high mortality rate was the reason for the "massive scale of importations."

One 2-year study indicated that of 19,361 mammals that left accredited zoos in the U.S. between 1992 and 1998, 7,420 (38%) went to dealers, auctions, hunting ranches, unaccredited zoos and individuals, and game farms.[70]

Animal welfare in zoos
Further information: Captivity (animal) and Behavioral enrichment

Bear cages, one square meter in size, in Dalian zoo, Port Arthur, Liaoning Province, China, in 1997.
Part of a series on
Animal rights
A paw
Overview
Movement
Animal abuse
Ideas
Related topics
icon Animals portal
vte
The welfare of zoo animals varies widely. Many zoos work to improve their animal enclosures and make it fit the animals' needs, but constraints such as size and expense can complicate this.[71][72] The type of enclosure and the husbandry are of great importance in determining the welfare of animals. Substandard enclosures can lead to decreased lifespans, caused by factors as human diseases, unsafe materials in the cages and possible escape attempts (Bendow 382). However, when zoos take time to think about the animal's welfare, zoos can become a place of refuge. Today, many zoos are improving enclosures by including tactile and sensory features in the habitat that allow animals to encourage natural behaviors. These additions can prove to be effective in improving the lives of animals in captivity. The tactile and sensory features will vary depending on the species of animal.[73] There are animals that are injured in the wild and are unable to survive on their own, but in the zoos they can live out the rest of their lives healthy and happy (McGaffin). In recent years, some zoos have chosen to move out some larger animals because they do not have the space available to provide an adequate enclosure for them (Lemonic, McDowell, and Bjerklie 50).

An issue with animal welfare in zoos is that best animal husbandry practices are often not completely known, especially for species that are only kept in a small number of zoos.[60] To solve this organizations like EAZA and AZA have begun to develop husbandry manuals.[74][75]

Behavioural restriction
Many modern zoos attempt to improve animal welfare by providing more space and behavioural enrichments. This often involves housing the animals in naturalistic enclosures that allow the animals to express more of their natural behaviours, such as roaming and foraging. Whilst many zoos have been working hard on this change, in some zoos, some enclosures still remain barren concrete enclosures or other minimally enriched cages.[76]

Sometimes animals are unable to perform certain behaviors in zoos, like seasonal migration or traveling over large distances. Whether these behaviors are necessary for good welfare however is unclear. Some behaviors are seen as essential for an animal's welfare whilst others are not.[77] It is however shown that even in limited spaces, certain natural behaviors can still be performed. A study in 2014 for example found that Asian elephants in zoos covered similar or higher walking distances when compared to sedentary wild populations.[78] Migration in the wild can also be related to food scarcity or other unfavorable environmental problems.[79] However a proper zoo enclosure never runs out of food or water, and in case of unfavorable temperatures or weather animals are provided with (indoor) shelter.

Abnormal behaviour
Further information: List of abnormal behaviours in animals
Animals in zoos can exhibit behaviors that are abnormal in their frequency, intensity, or would not normally be part of their behavioural repertoire. Whilst these types of behaviors can be a sign of bad welfare and stress, this is not necessarily the case. Other measurements or behavioral research is advised before determining whether an animal performing stereotypical behavior is living in bad welfare or not.[80] Examples of stereotypical behaviors are pacing, head-bobbing, obsessive grooming and feather-plucking[81] A study examining data collected over four decades found that polar bears, lions, tigers and cheetahs can display stereotypical behaviors in many older exhibits. However they also noted that in more modern naturalistic exhibits, these behaviors could completely disappear.[82] Elephants have also been recorded displaying stereotypical behaviours in the form of swaying back and forth, trunk swaying or route tracing. This has been observed in 54% of individuals in UK zoos.[83] However it has been shown that modern facilities and modern husbandry can greatly decrease or even entirely remove abnormal behaviors. A study of a group of elephants in Planckendael showed that the older wild-caught animals displayed many stereotypical behaviors. These elephants had spent part of their lives either in a circus or in other substandard enclosures. On the other hand, the elephants born in the modern facilities that had lived in a herd their whole life barely displayed any stereotypical behaviors at all.[84] The life history of an animal is thus extremely important when analyzing the causes of stereotypical behavior, as this can be a historical relict instead of a result of present-day husbandry.

Some zoos have used psychoactive drugs, such as Prozac, in attempting to stop animals from exhibiting the behaviors.[85]

Longevity
The influence on a zoological environment on animal's longevity is not straightforward. A study of 50 mammal species found that 84% of them lived longer in zoos than they would in the wild on average.[86] On the other hand, some research claims that elephants in Japanese zoos would live shorter than their wild counterparts at just 17 years. This has been refuted by other studies however.[87] Such studies might not yet fully represent recent improvements in husbandry. For example, studies show that captive-bred elephants already have a lower mortality risk then wild-caught ones.[88]

Climate conditions
Climatic conditions can make it difficult to keep some animals in zoos in some locations. For example, Alaska Zoo had an elephant named Maggie. She was housed in a small, indoor enclosure because the outdoor temperature was too low.[89][90]

Epidemiology
Tsetse flies have invaded zoos that have been established in the tsetse zone. More concerning, tsetse-borne species of trypanosomes have entered zoos outside the traditional tsetse zone in infected animals imported and added to their collections. Whether these can be controlled depends on several factors: Vale 1998 found that the technique used in placing attractants was important; and Green 1988, Torr 1994, Torr et al. 1995, and Torr et al. 1997 found the availability for specifically needed attractants for the specific job to also vary widely.[91][92]

Moral criticism
Some critics and many animal rights activists argue that zoo animals are treated as voyeuristic objects, rather than living creatures, and often suffer due to the transition from being free and wild to captivity.[93] Ever since imports of wild-caught animals can became more regulated by organizations like CITES and national laws, zoos have started sustaining their populations via breeding. This change started around the 1970s. Many corporations in the form of breeding programs have been set up since, for both common and endangered species.[94][95][96] Emma Marris, writing an opinion piece for The New York Times, suggested zoos "stopped breeding all their animals, with the possible exception of any endangered species with a real chance of being released back into the wild ... Eventually, the only animals on display would be a few ancient holdovers from the old menageries, animals in active conservation breeding programs and perhaps a few rescues. Such zoos might even be merged with sanctuaries."[97]

In 2017, activist travel company Responsible Travel and anti-captive animal charity the Born Free Foundation conducted an independent survey of 1,000 members of the UK public who had visited a zoo in the previous five years, to gauge public understanding of zoos' contribution to conservation. The results showed that zoos spend on average ten times less than visitors expect on conservation. It also emerged that three-quarters of visitors would expect at least one-fifth of the animals in a zoo to be endangered. The actual figure, according to the Born Free Foundation, is 10%.[98]

In light of these findings and ongoing animal welfare concerns,[99] in 2017, Responsible Travel became the first travel company to stop promoting holidays that include visits to a zoo.[100]

Live feeding
Globe icon.
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with China and the United Kingdom and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (January 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
In some countries, feeding live vertebrates to zoo animals is illegal under most circumstances. The UK Animal Welfare Act of 2006, for example, states that prey must be killed for feeding, unless this threatens the health of the predator.[101] Some zoos had already adopted such practices prior to the implementation of such policies. London Zoo, for example, stopped feeding live vertebrates in the 20th century, long before the Animal Welfare Act.[101] Despite being illegal in China, some zoos have been found to still feed live vertebrates to their predators. In some parks like Xiongsen Bear and Tiger Mountain Village, live chickens and other livestock were found to be thrown into the enclosures of tigers and other predators. In Guilin, in south-east China, live cows and pigs are thrown to tigers to amuse visitors. Other Chinese parks like Shenzhen Safari Park have already stopped this practice after facing heavy criticism.[102]

Regulation

WPA 1937 poster promoting visits to American zoos
United States
In the United States, any public animal exhibit must be licensed and inspected by the Department of Agriculture, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Depending on the animals they exhibit, the activities of zoos are regulated by laws including the Endangered Species Act, the Animal Welfare Act, the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 and others.[103]

Additionally, zoos in several countries may choose to pursue accreditation by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA), which originated in the U.S. To achieve accreditation, a zoo must pass an application and inspection process and meet or exceed the AZA's standards for animal health and welfare, fundraising, zoo staffing, and involvement in global conservation efforts. Inspection is performed by three experts (typically one veterinarian, one expert in animal care, and one expert in zoo management and operations) and then reviewed by a panel of twelve experts before accreditation is awarded. This accreditation process is repeated once every five years. The AZA estimates that there are approximately 2,400 animal exhibits operating under USDA license as of February 2007; fewer than 10% are accredited.[104]

Europe
The European Union introduced a directive to strengthen the conservation role of zoos, making it a statutory requirement that they participate in conservation and education, and requiring all member states to set up systems for their licensing and inspection.[105] Zoos are regulated in the UK by the Zoo Licensing Act of 1981, which came into effect in 1984. A zoo is defined as any "establishment where wild animals are kept for exhibition [...] to which members of the public have access, with or without charge for admission, seven or more days in any period of twelve consecutive months", excluding circuses and pet shops. The Act requires that all zoos be inspected and licensed, and that animals kept in enclosures are provided with a suitable environment in which they can express most normal behavior.[105]

See also
icon	Animals portal
List of zoo associations
Ex-situ conservation
In-situ conservation
Conservation movement
Index of conservation articles
Virtual zoo
Zoo emergency response team
Frozen zoo
Notes
 "Zoo | Animals & Facts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 2022-12-17.
 "Landmarks in ZSL History" Archived 2020-08-15 at the Wayback Machine, Zoological Society of London and Princess Margareta Hohenzolern Duda move in Zoo withK kinga Tanajewska ( daughter,n 1981 ).
 "Visitor Demographics". Association of Zoos and Aquariums. Archived from the original on 7 August 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
 Blunt 1976; Reichenbach 2002, pp. 151–163.
 Hyson 2000, p. 29; Hyson 2003, pp. 1356–1357.
 Maple 1995, p. 25.
 Robinson 1987a, pp. 10–17; Robinson 1987b, pp. 678–682.
 Conway 1995, pp. 259–276.
 World's First Zoo - Hierakonpolis, Egypt, Archaeology Magazine, http://www.archaeology.org/1001/topten/egypt.html Archived 2010-07-12 at the Wayback Machine
 "Zoo". Encyclopædia Britannica. 24 March 2017. Archived from the original on 20 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019.
 Lecky, W.E.H. History of European Morals from Augustus to Charlemagne. Vol. 1, Longmans, 1869, pp. 280–282.
 Blunt, Wilfred. The Ark in the Park: The Zoo in the Nineteenth Century. Hamish Hamilton, 1976, pp. 15–17.
 "Big cats prowled London's tower" Archived 2010-12-03 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, October 24, 2005.
 Martín del Campo y Sánchez, Rafael. "El parque zoológico de Moctezuma en Tenochtitlán" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017.
 M.G. Ash, ed., Mensch, Tier und Zoo – der Tiergarten Schönbrunn im internationalen Vergleich vom 18. Jahrhundert bis heute(Vienna: Böhlau, 2008).
 Pierre Serna, "The republican menagerie: animal politics in the French Revolution." French History 28.2 (2014): 188–206.
 Brown, Tim (2014-01-01). "'Zoo proliferation'—The first British Zoos from 1831–1840". Der Zoologische Garten. 83 (1): 17–27. Bibcode:2014DZGar..83...17B. doi:10.1016/j.zoolgart.2014.05.002. ISSN 0044-5169. Archived from the original on 2021-10-28. Retrieved 2020-03-26. in the years immediately after the establishment of the London Zoo, ... Britain had a number of these institutions when other countries did not have any or, at most, one such place
 "Introducing the Modern Zoo". Zoological Society of London. Archived from the original on 2013-12-14.
 "April 27". Today in Science History. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Retrieved 5 March 2008.
 "ZSL's History". ZSL. Archived from the original on 28 February 2008. Retrieved 5 March 2008.
 "The Role of Architectural Design in Promoting the Social Objectives of Zoos". Archived from the original on 2013-04-12. Retrieved 2012-12-17.
 Costello, John (June 9, 2011). "The great zoo's who". Irish Independent. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved June 9, 2011.
 Stewart, Herbert Leslie (29 December 2017). "The Dalhousie Review". Dalhousie University Press. Archived from the original on 7 June 2021. Retrieved 19 September 2017 – via Google Books.
 McGregor, Phlis (4 September 2015). "Halifax's first zoo is well-kept secret of Fairmount history". CBC News. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2017.
 Punch, Terry (May–June 2006). "Zoo Diary". Saltscapes Magazine. Archived from the original on 28 February 2017.
 Rene S. Ebersole (November 2001). "The New Zoo". Audubon Magazine. National Audubon Society. Archived from the original on 2007-09-06. Retrieved 2007-12-18.
 Nigel Rothfels, Savages and Beasts: The Birth of the Modern Zoo (2008)
 "Wielkie liczenie w zoo we Wrocławiu. Zobacz, ile zwierząt w nim mieszka" [Counting great at the zoo in Wrocław. See how many animals live in it]. wroclaw.wyborcza.pl (in Polish). January 19, 2016. Archived from the original on May 6, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2021.
 Isler, Danuta. "A trip to Wroclaw Afrykarium". Radio Poland. Archived from the original on 2018-07-13. Retrieved 2018-07-13.
 Jesse C. Donahue, and Erik K. Trump, American zoos during the depression: a new deal for animals (McFarland, 2014).
 Francis Desiderio, "Raising the Bars: The Transformation of Atlanta's Zoo, 1889-2000." Atlanta History 18.4 (2000): 8–64.
 See Association of Zoos & Aquariums, 2020 Archived 2020-11-12 at the Wayback Machine
 Daniel E. Bender, The Animal Game: Searching for Wildness at the American Zoo (Harvard University Press, 2016).
 Ian Jared Miller, and Harriet Ritvo, The Nature of the Beasts: Empire and Exhibition at the Tokyo Imperial Zoo (2013) pp. 4, 99–105. excerpt Archived 2021-10-28 at the Wayback Machine
 Aso Noriko, Public Properties: Museums in Imperial Japan (Duke UP, 2014).
 See Kisling, Vernon N. (ed.): Zoo and Aquarium History, Boca Raton 2001. ISBN 0-8493-2100-X; Hoage, R. J. Deiss and William A. (ed.): New Worlds, New Animals, Washington 1996. ISBN 0-8018-5110-6; Hanson, Elizabeth. Animal Attractions, Princeton 2002. ISBN 0-691-05992-6; and Hancocks, David. A Different Nature, Berkeley 2001. ISBN 0-520-21879-5
 Donahue, Jesse and Trump, Erik. Political Animals: Public Art in American Zoos and Aquariums. Lexington Books, 2007, p. 79.
 Masci, David. "Zoos in the 21st Century." CQ Researcher 28 Apr. 2000: 353–76. Web. 26 Jan. 2014.
 Bradford, Phillips Verner and Blume, Harvey. Ota Benga: The Pygmy in the Zoo. St. Martins Press, 1992.
 "Man and Monkey Show Disapproved by Clergy" Archived 2016-05-08 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, September 10, 1906.
 Blanchard, Pascal; Bancel, Nicolas; and Lemaire, Sandrine. "From human zoos to colonial apotheoses: the era of exhibiting the Other" Archived April 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Africultures.
 Ferral, Katelyn (2010-07-15). "N.C. Zoo, bucking a trend, sets an attendance record". Newsobserver.com. Archived from the original on 2013-05-09. Retrieved 2013-05-04.
 Guzoo Animal Farm Archived May 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, website about Canadian roadside zoos, accessed June 18, 2009.
 Roadside zoo animals starving. Archived 2016-03-12 at the Wayback Machine Free Lance-Star. 11 Jan. 1997.
 Dixon, Jennifer. House panel told of abuses by zoos. Archived 2016-03-12 at the Wayback Machine Times Daily. 8 July 1992.
 Elwood, Ian (8 April 2014). "Animal Abandonment is a Crime". Animal Legal Defense Fund. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017.
 "- APHIS Inspection Report of Cricket Hollow Zoo, May 21 2014".[permanent dead link]
 "Zoo: Procurement and care of animals," Encyclopædia Britannica, 2008.
 "Population Q&A". Zooquaria. Autumn 2016 (94). EAZA: 32–33.
 Kleiman, Thompson and Baer (2010). Wild Mammals in Captivity. University of Chicago Press. pp. 265–266. ISBN 978-0-226-44009-5.
 Hunn, D. (February 16, 2014). "What happens when zoo contraceptives work too well?". St. Louis Dispatch. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2016.
 "Marius The Giraffe Was Not Alone: Zoos in Europe Kill 5,000 Healthy Animals Annually". Huffington Post. February 27, 2014. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2016.
 Johnston, I. (February 9, 2014). "Copenhagen Zoo kills 'surplus' young giraffe Marius despite online petition". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 10, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014.
 Ralls, Katherine (2001). Encyclopedia of Biodiversity. Smithsonian Institution USA. pp. 599–607.
 "Reintroduction Programs". American Association of Zoos and Aquariums. 2022.
 Carrie Friese (2013). Cloning Wild Life: Zoos, Captivity, and the Future of Endangered Animals. NYU Press. p. 3 and 14. ISBN 9780814729106.
 Tudge, Colin. Last Animals in the Zoo: How Mass Extinction Can Be Stopped, London 1991. ISBN 1-55963-157-0
 "Manifesto for Zoos" Archived August 23, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, John Regan Associates, 2004.
 "World Zoo and Aquarium Conservation Strategy" Archived 2007-02-16 at the Wayback Machine, World Association of Zoos and Aquariums.
 Rowden, Lewis J.; Rose, Paul E. (2016). "A global survey of banteng (Bos javanicus) housing and husbandry: Banteng Husbandry Survey". Zoo Biology. 35 (6): 546–555. doi:10.1002/zoo.21329. hdl:10871/24538. PMID 27735990.
 Brady, Leanna; Young, Richard; Goetz, Matthias; Dawson, Jeff (October 2017). "Increasing zoo's conservation potential through understanding barriers to holding globally threatened amphibians". Biodiversity and Conservation. 26 (11): 2736 (or 2). Bibcode:2017BiCon..26.2735B. doi:10.1007/s10531-017-1384-y. S2CID 24619590. ProQuest 1943858410.
 African Association of Zoological Gardens and Aquaria
 American Zoo and Aquarium Association Archived 2011-02-22 at the Wayback Machine and the Canadian Association of Zoos and Aquariums Archived 2010-07-28 at the Wayback Machine
 "AquaZoos - Educational Writing Group". AquaZoos. Archived from the original on February 2, 2007.
 "European Association of Zoos and Aquaria » EAZA". www.eaza.net. Archived from the original on 2021-01-25. Retrieved 2021-01-22.
 Akpan, Nsikan (12 May 2015). "Smithsonian's mystery of the black-crowned night herons solved by satellites". PBS NewsHour. PBS. Archived from the original on 1 June 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2016.
 "Birdworld Animals". Birdworld. Archived from the original on 4 February 2015. Retrieved 21 January 2015.
 "Graureiher". Tiergarten Schoenbrunn. Archived from the original on 10 December 2014. Retrieved 6 December 2014.
 Jensen, Derrick and Tweedy-Holmes Karen. Thought to exist in the wild: awakening from the nightmare of zoos. No Voice Unheard, 2007, p. 21; Baratay, Eric and Hardouin-Fugier, Elisabeth. Zoo: A History of the Zoological Gardens of the West. Reaktion, London. 2002.
 Goldston, Linda. February 11, 1999, cited in Scully, Matthew. Dominion. St. Martin's Griffin, 2004 (paperback), p. 64.
 Norton, Bryan G.; Hutchins, Michael; Stevens, Elizabeth F.; Maple, Terry L. (ed.): Ethics on the Ark. Zoos, Animal Welfare, and Wildlife Conservation. Washington, D.C., 1995. ISBN 1-56098-515-1
 Malmud, Randy. Reading Zoos. Representations of Animals and Captivity. New York, 1998. ISBN 0-8147-5602-6
 Beer, Haley N.; Shrader, Trenton C.; Schmidt, Ty B.; Yates, Dustin T. (December 2023). "The Evolution of Zoos as Conservation Institutions: A Summary of the Transition from Menageries to Zoological Gardens and Parallel Improvement of Mammalian Welfare Management". Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens. 4 (4): 648–664. doi:10.3390/jzbg4040046. ISSN 2673-5636.
 "PROGRAMMES » EAZA". www.eaza.net. Archived from the original on 2021-01-26. Retrieved 2021-01-22.
 "Animal Care Manuals | Association of Zoos & Aquariums". www.aza.org. Archived from the original on 2021-01-25. Retrieved 2021-01-24.
 Masci, D. (2000). "Zoos in the 21st century". CQ Researcher: 353–76. Archived from the original on 2015-04-02. Retrieved 2016-12-16.
 Veasey, Jake & Waran, Natalie & Young, Robert. (1996). On Comparing the Behaviour of Zoo Housed Animals with Wild Conspecifics as a Welfare Indicator. Animal Welfare. 5. 13–24.
 Rowell, Z. E. (2014). Locomotion in captive Asian elephants (Elephas maximus). Journal of Zoo and Aquarium Research, 2(4), 130–135. https://doi.org/10.19227/jzar.v2i4.50 Archived 2021-10-28 at the Wayback Machine
 "How and Why Animals Migrate - NatureWorks". nhpbs.org. Archived from the original on 2020-08-10. Retrieved 2021-01-22.
 Mason, Georgia & Latham, N.R.. (2004). Can't stop, won't stop: Is stereotypy a reliable animal welfare indicator?. Animal Welfare. 13. 57–69.
 "Are Zoos good or bad for animals?". Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved 28 October 2013.
 Derr, Mark. "Big Beasts, Tight Space and a Call for Change in Journal Report," The New York Times, October 2, 2003.
 Harris, M.; Sherwin, C.; Harris, S. (10 November 2008). "Defra Final Report on Elephant Welfare" (PDF). University of Bristol. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 November 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2011.
 Vleugels. E. (2016). Onderzoek naar stereotyp, agressief en dominant gedrag en locatiegebruik bij een groep Aziatische olifanten gehuisvest in Planckendael, UNIVERSITEIT GENT FACULTEIT DIERGENEESKUNDE
 Braitman, Laurel. "Even the Gorillas and Bears in Our Zoos Are Hooked on Prozac". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 2022-10-20.
 Tidière, M., Gaillard, JM., Berger, V. et al. Comparative analyses of longevity and senescence reveal variable survival benefits of living in zoos across mammals. Sci Rep 6, 36361 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep36361 Archived 2021-10-28 at the Wayback Machine
 Mott, M. (11 December 2008). "Wild elephants live longer than their zoo counterparts". National Geographic News. Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 24 October 2012.
 Lahdenperä M, Mar KU, Courtiol A, Lummaa V. Differences in age-specific mortality between wild-caught and captive-born Asian elephants [published correction appears in Nat Commun. 2018 Aug 28;9(1):3544]. Nat Commun. 2018;9(1):3023. Published 2018 Aug 7. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05515-8
 Kershaw, Sarah (10 January 2005). "Alaska's lone zoo elephant heats up national debate". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 30 January 2016. Retrieved 23 January 2016.
 Pemberton, Mary (11 January 2007). "Alaska's only elephant heads to California". NBC. Archived from the original on 30 January 2016. Retrieved 23 January 2016.
 Mbaya, A. W.; Aliyu, M. M.; Ibrahim, U. I. (2009-04-02). "The clinico-pathology and mechanisms of trypanosomosis in captive and free-living wild animals: A review". Veterinary Research Communications. 33 (7). Springer: 793–809. doi:10.1007/s11259-009-9214-7. ISSN 0165-7380. PMID 19340600. S2CID 23405683.
 Adler, Peter H.; Tuten, Holly C.; Nelder, Mark P. (2011-01-07). "Arthropods of Medicoveterinary Importance in Zoos". Annual Review of Entomology. 56 (1). Annual Reviews: 123–142. doi:10.1146/annurev-ento-120709-144741. ISSN 0066-4170. PMID 20731604.
 Jensen, p. 48.
 "Where do our animals come from and where do they go?". Zoological Society of London (ZSL). Archived from the original on 2020-11-02. Retrieved 2021-01-22.
 "About The Zoological Society - Zoological Society of Milwaukee". Zoological Society of Milwaukee. Archived from the original on 2021-10-28. Retrieved 2021-10-28.
 "PROGRAMMES » EAZA". www.eaza.net. Archived from the original on 2021-01-26. Retrieved 2021-01-22.
 Marris, Emma (2021-06-11). "Opinion | Modern Zoos Are Not Worth the Moral Cost". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2022-10-20.
 "Are zoos as good for wildlife as they make out? | Responsible Travel". www.responsibletravel.com. Retrieved 2023-09-27.
 "ZOOS AND AQUARIA". www.bornfree.org.uk. Retrieved 2023-09-27.
 @NatGeoUK (2017-05-31). "Hot topic: is it time for zoos to be banned?". National Geographic. Retrieved 2023-09-27.
 "Live-Feeding Prey to Captive Predators". Faunalytics. October 17, 2014. Archived from the original on January 30, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021.
 "Ferocity training". Sunday Morning Post, Hong Kong. November 29, 1999. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved June 24, 2009.
 Grech, Kali S. "Overview of the Laws Affecting Zoos" Archived 2012-06-24 at the Wayback Machine, Michigan State University College of Law, Animal Legal & Historical Center, 2004.
 "AZA Accreditation Introduction". Archived from the original on November 2, 2007.
 "The Zoo Licensing Act 1981" Archived May 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Department for Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs.
Further reading
Baratay, Eric, and Elizabeth Hardouin-Fugier. (2002) History of Zoological Gardens in the West
Blunt, Wilfrid (1976). The Ark in the Park: The Zoo in the Nineteenth Century, Hamish Hamilton, London. ISBN 0-241-89331-3 online
Braverman, Irus (2012). Zooland: The Institution of Captivity, Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804783576 excerpt Archived 2021-04-11 at the Wayback Machine
Bruce, Gary. (2017) Through the Lion Gate: A History of the Berlin Zoo excerpt Archived 2021-10-28 at the Wayback Machine
Conway, William (1995). "The conservation park: A new zoo synthesis for a changed world", in The Ark Evolving: Zoos and Aquariums in Transition, Wemmer, Christen M. (ed.), Smithsonian Institution Conservation and Research Center, Front Royal, Virginia.
Donahue, Jesse C., and Erik K. Trump. (2014) American zoos during the depression: a new deal for animals (McFarland, 2014).
Fisher, James. (1967) Zoos of the World: The Story of Animals in Captivity, popular history
Hancocks, David. A Different Nature: The Paradoxical World of Zoos and Their Uncertain Future (2003) excerpt
Hardouin-Fugier, Elisabeth. (2004) Zoo: A History of Zoological Gardens in the West
Hyson, Jeffrey (2000). "Jungle of Eden: The Design of American Zoos" in Environmentalism in Landscape Architecture, Conan, Michel (ed.), Dumbarton Oaks, Washington. ISBN 0-88402-278-1
Hochadel, Oliver. "Watching Exotic Animals Next Door: 'Scientific' Observations at the Zoo (ca. 1870–1910)."Science in Context(June 2011) 24#2 pp 183–214. online Archived 2021-08-17 at the Wayback Machine
Hyson, Jeffrey (2003). "Zoos," in Krech III, Shepard; Merchant, Carolyn; McNeill, John Robert, eds. (2004). Encyclopedia of World Environmental History. Vol. 3: O–Z, Index. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-93735-1.
The International Zoo Yearbook, annual since 1959 from the Zoological Society of London.
Kohler, Robert E. (2006). All Creatures: Naturalists, Collectors, and Biodiversity, 1850–1950 (Princeton University Press).
Kisling, Vernon N., ed. (2001) Zoo and Aquarium History: Ancient Animal Collections to Zoological Gardens (2001) excerpt Archived 2016-01-25 at the Wayback Machine.
Maddeaux, Sarah-Joy. (2014) "A 'delightful resort for persons of all ages, and more especially for the young': Children at Bristol Zoo Gardens, 1835–1940." Journal of the History of Childhood and Youth 7.1 (2014): 87–106 excerpt.
Maple, Terry (1995). "Toward a Responsible Zoo Agenda", in Ethics on the Ark: Zoos, Animal Welfare, and Wildlife Conservation, Norton, Bryan G., Hutchins, Michael, Stevens, Elizabeth F. and Maple, Terry L. (ed.), Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington. ISBN 1-56098-515-1
Meuser, Natascha (2019). Zoo Buildings. Construction and Design Manual. DOM publishers, Berlin. ISBN 978-3-86922-680-4
Miller, Ian Jared, and Harriet Ritvo. The Nature of the Beasts: Empire and Exhibition at the Tokyo Imperial Zoo (2013) excerpt
Murphy, James B. (2007) Herpetological History of the Zoo & Aquarium World
Reichenbach, Herman (2002). "Lost Menageries: Why and How Zoos Disappear (Part 1)", International Zoo News Vol.49/3 (No.316), April–May 2002.
Robinson, Michael H. (1987a). "Beyond the zoo: The biopark", Defenders of Wildlife Magazine, Vol. 62, No. 6.
Robinson, Michael H. (1987b). "Towards the Biopark: The Zoo That Is Not", American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums, Annual Proceedings.
Rothfels, Nigel. (2008) Savages and Beasts: The Birth of the Modern Zoo excerpt
Vandersommers, Daniel. (2023) Entangled Encounters at the National Zoo: Stories from the Animal Archive (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2023).
Woods, Abigail. (2018) "Doctors in the Zoo: Connecting Human and Animal Health in British Zoological Gardens, c. 1828–1890." In Animals and the Shaping of Modern Medicine (Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 2018), pp. 27–69.
External links

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zoos.

Look up zoo in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Zoos Worldwide Zoos, aquariums, animal sanctuaries and wildlife parks
Zoological Gardens keeping Asian Elephants
The Bartlett Society: Devoted to studying yesterday's methods of keeping wild animals, download page
vte
Zoos, aquariums, and aviaries
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: ZoosAnimal rightsAnimal welfareZoology
This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 20:43 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Zoo

102 languages
Add topic

The National Zoological Park, commonly known as the National Zoo, is one of the oldest zoos in the United States. The zoo is part of the Smithsonian Institution and does not charge admission. Founded in 1889, its mission is to "provide engaging experiences with animals and create and share knowledge to save wildlife and habitats".



WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
History
Types of seafood
Processing
Consumption
Texture and taste
Health benefits
Health hazards
Mislabelling
Sustainability
In religion
See also
References

Citations
Sources
Further reading
External links
Seafood

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Seafood (band) and Seafood (film). For just fish, see Fish as food.
A seafood platter composed of shrimp, oyster, snail and crab.
Seafood includes any form of food taken from the sea.

Annual seafood consumption per capita (2017)[1]
Seafood is any form of sea life regarded as food by humans, prominently including fish and shellfish. Shellfish include various species of molluscs (e.g., bivalve molluscs such as clams, oysters, and mussels, and cephalopods such as octopus and squid), crustaceans (e.g. shrimp, crabs, and lobster), and echinoderms (e.g. sea cucumbers and sea urchins). Historically, marine mammals such as cetaceans (whales and dolphins) as well as seals have been eaten as food, though that happens to a lesser extent in modern times. Edible sea plants such as some seaweeds and microalgae are widely eaten as sea vegetables around the world, especially in Asia.

Seafood is an important source of (animal) protein in many diets around the world, especially in coastal areas. Semi-vegetarians who consume seafood as the only source of meat are said to adhere to pescetarianism.

The harvesting of wild seafood is usually known as fishing or hunting, while the cultivation and farming of seafood is known as aquaculture and fish farming (in the case of fish). Most of the seafood harvest is consumed by humans, but a significant proportion is used as fish food to farm other fish or rear farm animals. Some seafoods (i.e. kelp) are used as food for other plants (a fertilizer). In these ways, seafoods are used to produce further food for human consumption. Also, products such as fish oil, spirulina tablets, fish collagen, and chitin are made from seafoods. Some seafood is fed to aquarium fish, or used to feed domestic pets such as cats. A small proportion is used in medicine or is used industrially for nonfood purposes (e.g. leather).

History
Main article: History of seafood

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Various foods depicted in an Egyptian burial chamber, including fish, c. 1400 BCE
The harvesting, processing, and consuming of seafoods are ancient practices with archaeological evidence dating back well into the Paleolithic.[2][3] Findings in a sea cave at Pinnacle Point in South Africa indicate Homo sapiens (modern humans) harvested marine life as early as 165,000 years ago,[2] while the Neanderthals, an extinct human species contemporary with early Homo sapiens, appear to have been eating seafood at sites along the Mediterranean coast beginning around the same time.[4] Isotopic analysis of the skeletal remains of Tianyuan man, a 40,000-year-old anatomically modern human from eastern Asia, has shown that he regularly consumed freshwater fish.[5][6] Archaeology features such as shell middens,[7] discarded fish bones, and cave paintings show that sea foods were important for survival and consumed in significant quantities. During this period, most people lived a hunter-gatherer lifestyle and were, of necessity, constantly on the move. However, early examples of permanent settlements (though not necessarily permanently occupied), such as those at Lepenski Vir, were almost always associated with fishing as a major source of food.

The ancient river Nile was full of fish; fresh and dried fish were a staple food for much of the population.[8] The Egyptians had implements and methods for fishing and these are illustrated in tomb scenes, drawings, and papyrus documents. Some representations hint at fishing being pursued as a pastime.


World fisheries harvest, both wild and farmed, in million tonnes, 1950–2010[9]

World fisheries harvest, wild capture versus aquaculture production, in million tonnes 1950–2010[9]
Fishing scenes are rarely represented in ancient Greek culture, a reflection of the low social status of fishing. However, Oppian of Corycus, a Greek author wrote a major treatise on sea fishing, the Halieulica or Halieutika, composed between 177 and 180. This is the earliest such work to have survived to the modern day. The consumption of fish varied by the wealth and location of the household. In the Greek islands and on the coast, fresh fish and seafood (squid, octopus, and shellfish) were common. They were eaten locally but more often transported inland. Sardines and anchovies were regular fare for the citizens of Athens. They were sometimes sold fresh, but more frequently salted. A stele of the late 3rd century BCE from the small Boeotian city of Akraiphia, on Lake Copais, provides us with a list of fish prices. The cheapest was skaren (probably parrotfish) whereas Atlantic bluefin tuna was three times as expensive.[10] Common salt water fish were yellowfin tuna, red mullet, ray, swordfish, or sturgeon, a delicacy that was eaten salted. Lake Copais itself was famous in all of Greece for its eels, celebrated by the hero of The Acharnians. Other freshwater fish were pike fish, carp, and the less appreciated catfish.

Pictorial evidence of Roman fishing comes from mosaics.[11] At a certain time, the goatfish was considered the epitome of luxury, above all because its scales exhibit a bright red colour when it dies out of water. For this reason, these fish were occasionally allowed to die slowly at the table. There even was a recipe where this would take place in Garo, in the sauce. At the beginning of the Imperial era, however, this custom suddenly came to an end, which is why mullus in the feast of Trimalchio (see the Satyricon) could be shown as a characteristic of the parvenu, who bores his guests with an unfashionable display of dying fish.

In medieval times, seafood was less prestigious than other animal meats, and was often seen as merely an alternative to meat on fast days. Still, seafood was the mainstay of many coastal populations. Kippers made from herring caught in the North Sea could be found in markets as far away as Constantinople.[12] While large quantities of fish were eaten fresh, a large proportion was salted, dried, and, to a lesser extent, smoked. Stockfish - cod that was split down the middle, fixed to a pole, and dried - was very common, though preparation could be time-consuming, and meant beating the dried fish with a mallet before soaking it in water. A wide range of mollusks (including oysters, mussels and scallops) were eaten by coastal and river-dwelling populations, and freshwater crayfish were seen as a desirable alternative to meat during fish days. Compared to meat, fish was much more expensive for inland populations, especially in Central Europe, and therefore not an option for most.[13]

Modern knowledge of the reproductive cycles of aquatic species has led to the development of hatcheries and improved techniques of fish farming and aquaculture. A better understanding of the hazards of eating raw and undercooked fish and shellfish has led to improved preservation methods and processing.

Types of seafood
See also: List of types of seafood and List of harvested aquatic animals by weight
The following table is based on the ISSCAAP classification (International Standard Statistical Classification of Aquatic Animals and Plants) used by the FAO to collect and compile fishery statistics.[14] The production figures have been extracted from the FAO FishStat database,[15] and include both capture from wild fisheries and aquaculture production.

Group	Image	Subgroup	Description	2010 production
1000 tonnes[15]
fish	Fish are aquatic vertebrates which lack limbs with digits, use gills to breathe, and have heads protected by hard bone or cartilage skulls. See: Fish (food).Total for fish:  	106,639
Pelagic fish (Atlantic bluefin tuna)	marine
pelagic	Pelagic fish live and feed near the surface or in the water column of the sea, but not on the bottom of the sea. The main seafood groups can be divided into larger predator fish (sharks, tuna, billfish, mahi-mahi, mackerel, salmon) and smaller forage fish (herring, sardines, sprats, anchovies, menhaden). The smaller forage fish feed on plankton, and can accumulate toxins to a degree. The larger predator fish feed on the forage fish, and accumulate toxins to a much higher degree than the forage fish.	
33,974
Demersal fish (American plaice)	marine
demersal	Demersal fish live and feed on or near the bottom of the sea.[16] Some seafood groups are cod, flatfish, grouper and stingrays. Demersal fish feed mainly on crustaceans they find on the sea floor, and are more sedentary than the pelagic fish. Pelagic fish usually have the red flesh characteristic of the powerful swimming muscles they need, while demersal fish usually have white flesh.	
23,806
Diadromous fish (Atlantic salmon)	diadromous	Diadromous fish are fishes which migrate between the sea and fresh water. Some seafood groups are salmon, shad, eels and lampreys. See: Salmon run.	
5,348
Freshwater fish (tilapia)	freshwater	Freshwater fish live in rivers, lakes, reservoirs, and ponds. Some seafood groups are carp, tilapia, catfish, bass, and trout. Generally, freshwater fish lend themselves to fish farming more readily than the ocean fish, and the larger part of the tonnage reported here refers to farmed fish.	
43,511
molluscs	Molluscs (from the Latin molluscus, meaning soft) are invertebrates with soft bodies that are not segmented like crustaceans. Bivalves and gastropods are protected by a calcareous shell which grows as the mollusc grows.Total for molluscs:  	
20,797
Bivalve	bivalves	Bivalves, sometimes referred to as clams, have a protective shell in two hinged parts. A valve is the name used for the protective shell of a bivalve, so bivalve literally means two shells. Important seafood bivalves include oysters, scallops, mussels and cockles. Most of these are filter feeders which bury themselves in sediment on the seabed where they are safe from predation. Others lie on the sea floor or attach themselves to rocks or other hard surfaces. Some, such as scallops, can swim. Bivalves have long been a part of the diet of coastal communities. Oysters were cultured in ponds by the Romans and mariculture has more recently become an important source of bivalves for food.	12,585
Empty shell of an abalone	gastropods	Aquatic gastropods, also known as sea snails, are univalves which means they have a protective shell that is in a single piece. Gastropod literally means stomach-foot, because they appear to crawl on their stomachs. Common seafood groups are abalone, conch, limpets, whelks and periwinkles.	526
Octopus	cephalopods	Cephalopods, except for nautilus, are not protected by an external shell. Cephalopod literally means head-foots, because they have limbs which appear to issue from their head. They have excellent vision and high intelligence. Cephalopods propel themselves with a water jet and lay down "smoke screens" with ink. Examples are octopus, squid and cuttlefish. They are eaten in many cultures. Depending on the species, the arms and sometimes other body parts are prepared in various ways. Octopus must be boiled properly to rid it of slime, smell, and residual ink. Squid are popular in Japan. In Mediterranean countries and in English-speaking countries squid are often referred to as calamari.[17] Cuttlefish is less eaten than squid, though it is popular in Italy and dried, shredded cuttlefish is a snack food in East Asia. See: Squid (food), Octopus (food).	3,653
other	Molluscs not included above are chitons.	4,033
crustaceans	Crustaceans (from Latin crusta, meaning crust) are invertebrates with segmented bodies protected by hard crusts (shells or exoskeletons), usually made of chitin and structured somewhat like a knight's armour. The shells do not grow, and must periodically be shed or moulted. Usually two legs or limbs issue from each segment. Most commercial crustaceans are decapods, that is they have ten legs, and have compound eyes set on stalks. Their shell turns pink or red when cooked.Total for crustaceans:  	11,827
Northern prawn	shrimps	Shrimp and prawns are small, slender, stalk-eyed ten-legged crustaceans with long spiny rostrums. They are widespread, and can be found near the seafloor of most coasts and estuaries, as well as in rivers and lakes. They play important roles in the food chain. There are numerous species, and usually there is a species adapted to any particular habitat. Any small crustacean which resembles a shrimp tends to be called one.[18] See: shrimp (food), shrimp fishery, shrimp farming, freshwater prawn farming.	6,917
Mud crab	crabs	Crabs are stalk-eyed ten-legged crustaceans, usually walk sideways, and have grasping claws as their front pair of limbs. They have small abdomens, short antennae, and a short carapace that is wide and flat. Also usually included are king crabs and coconut crabs, even if these belongs to a different group of decapods than the true crabs. See: crab fisheries.	1,679[19]
Clawed lobster	lobsters	Clawed lobsters and spiny lobsters are stalk-eyed ten-legged crustaceans with long abdomens. The clawed lobster has large asymmetrical claws for its front pair of limbs, one for crushing and one for cutting (pictured). The spiny lobster lacks the large claws, but has a long, spiny antennae and a spiny carapace. Lobsters are larger than most shrimp or crabs. See: lobster fishing.	281[20]
Northern krill	krill	Krill resemble small shrimp, however they have external gills and more than ten legs (swimming plus feeding and grooming legs). They are found in oceans around the world where they filter feed in huge pelagic swarms.[21] Like shrimp, they are an important part of the marine food chain, converting phytoplankton into a form larger animals can consume. Each year, larger animals eat half the estimated biomass of krill (about 600 million tonnes).[21] Humans consume krill in Japan and Russia, but most of the krill harvest is used to make fish feed and for extracting oil. Krill oil contains omega-3 fatty acids, similar to fish oil. See: Krill fishery.	215
other	Crustaceans not included above are gooseneck barnacles, giant barnacle, mantis shrimp and brine shrimp.[22]	1,359
other aquatic animals	Total for other aquatic animals:  	1,409+
Dolphin

Fluke of a whale

aquatic mammals	Marine mammals form a diverse group of 128 species that rely on the ocean for their existence.[23] Whale meat is still harvested from legal, non-commercial hunts.[24] About one thousand long-finned pilot whales are still killed annually.[25] Japan has resumed hunting for whales, which they call "research whaling".[26] In modern Japan, two cuts of whale meat are usually distinguished: the belly meat and the more valued tail or fluke meat. Fluke meat can sell for $200 per kilogram, three times the price of belly meat.[27] Fin whales are particularly desired because they are thought to yield the best quality fluke meat.[28] In Taiji in Japan and parts of Scandinavia such as the Faroe Islands, dolphins are traditionally considered food, and are killed in harpoon or drive hunts.[29] Ringed seals are still an important food source for the people of Nunavut[30] and are also hunted and eaten in Alaska.[31] The meat of sea mammals can be high in mercury, and may pose health dangers to humans when consumed.[32] The FAO records only the reported numbers of aquatic mammals harvested, and not the tonnage. In 2010, it reported 2500 whales, 12,000 dolphins and 182,000 seals. See: marine mammals as food, whale meat, seal hunting.	?
Sea cucumber	aquatic reptiles	Sea turtles have long been valued as food in many parts of the world. Fifth century BC Chinese texts describe sea turtles as exotic delicacies.[33] Sea turtles are caught worldwide, although in many countries it is illegal to hunt most species.[34] Many coastal communities around the world depend on sea turtles as a source of protein, often gathering sea turtle eggs, and keeping captured sea turtles alive on their backs until needed for consumption.[35] Most species of sea turtle are now endangered, and some are critically endangered.[36]	296+
Sea cucumber	echinoderms	Echinoderms are headless invertebrates, found on the seafloor in all oceans and at all depths. They are not found in fresh water. They usually have a five-pointed radial symmetry, and move, breathe and perceive with their retractable tube feet. They are covered with a calcareous and spiky test or skin. The name echinoderm comes from the Greek ekhinos meaning hedgehog, and dermatos meaning skin. Echinoderms used for seafood include sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and occasionally starfish. Wild sea cucumbers are caught by divers and in China they are farmed commercially in artificial ponds.[37] The gonads of both male and female sea urchins, usually called sea urchin roe or corals,[38] are delicacies in many parts of the world.[39][40]	373
Rehydrated jellyfish strips	jellyfish	Jellyfish are soft and gelatinous, with a body shaped like an umbrella or bell which pulsates for locomotion. They have long, trailing tentacles with stings for capturing prey. They are found free-swimming in the water column in all oceans, and are occasionally found in freshwater. Jellyfish must be dried within hours to prevent spoiling. In Japan they are regarded as a delicacy. Traditional processing methods are carried out by a jellyfish master. This involve a 20 to 40-day multi-phase procedure which starts with removing the gonads and mucous membranes. The umbrella and oral arms are then treated with a mixture of table salt and alum, and compressed. Processing reduces liquefaction, odor, the growth of spoilage organisms, and makes the jellyfish drier and more acidic, producing a crisp and crunchy texture. Only scyphozoan jellyfish belonging to the order Rhizostomeae are harvested for food; about 12 of the approximately 85 species. Most of the harvest takes place in southeast Asia.[41][42][43]	
404
Sea squirt	other	Aquatic animals not included above, such as waterfowl, frogs, spoon worms, peanut worms, palolo worms, lamp shells, lancelets, sea anemones and sea squirts (pictured).	336
aquatic plants and microphytes	Total for aquatic plants and microphytes:  	19,893
Seaweed/sea urchin soup
Sea grapes

seaweed	Seaweed is a loose colloquial term which lacks a formal definition. Broadly, the term is applied to the larger, macroscopic forms of algae, as opposed to microalga. Examples of seaweed groups are the multicellular red, brown and green algae.[44] Edible seaweeds usually contain high amounts of fibre and, in contrast to terrestrial plants, contain a complete protein.[45] Seaweeds are used extensively as food in coastal cuisines around the world. Seaweed has been a part of diets in China, Japan, and Korea since prehistoric times.[46] Seaweed is also consumed in many traditional European societies, in Iceland and western Norway, the Atlantic coast of France, northern and western Ireland, Wales and some coastal parts of South West England,[47] as well as Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. See: edible seaweed, seaweed farming, aquaculture of giant kelp, laverbread.	
Spirulina tablets	microphytes	Microphytes are microscopic organisms, and can be algal, bacterial or fungal. Microalgae are another type of aquatic plant, and includes species that can be consumed by humans and animals. Some species of aquatic bacteria can also be used as seafood, such as spirulina (pictured in tablet form), a type of cyanobacteria. See: culture of microalgae in hatcheries.	
Lotus bud	aquatic plants	Edible aquatic plants are flowering plants and ferns that have adapted to a life in water. Known examples are duck potato, water chestnut, cattail, watercress, lotus and nardoo.	
Total production (thousand tonnes)  	168,447
Processing

Deep-fried starfish for sale as "food-on-a-stick", Beijing

Fish at an Asian supermarket in Virginia, U.S.

Seafood in Étretat, France

Fish for sale in a market in Hong Kong

Penis fish (a spoon worm) for sale in a market, South Korea

Seafood tanks in a Cantonese restaurant

Raw seafoods

Grilling seafood
See also: Fish processing and Fish preservation
Fish is a highly perishable product: the "fishy" smell of dead fish is due to the breakdown of amino acids into biogenic amines and ammonia.[48]

Live food fish are often transported in tanks at high expense for an international market that prefers its seafood killed immediately before it is cooked. Delivery of live fish without water is also being explored.[49] While some seafood restaurants keep live fish in aquaria for display purposes or cultural beliefs, the majority of live fish are kept for dining customers. The live food fish trade in Hong Kong, for example, is estimated to have driven imports of live food fish to more than 15,000 tonnes in 2000. Worldwide sales that year were estimated at US$400 million, according to the World Resources Institute.[50]

If the cool chain has not been adhered to correctly, food products generally decay and become harmful before the validity date printed on the package. As the potential harm for a consumer when eating rotten fish is much larger than for example with dairy products, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has introduced regulation in the USA requiring the use of a time temperature indicator on certain fresh chilled seafood products.[51]

Because fresh fish is highly perishable, it must be eaten promptly or discarded; it can be kept for only a short time. In many countries, fresh fish are filleted and displayed for sale on a bed of crushed ice or refrigerated. Fresh fish is most commonly found near bodies of water, but the advent of refrigerated train and truck transportation has made fresh fish more widely available inland.[52]

Long term preservation of fish is accomplished in a variety of ways. The oldest and still most widely used techniques are drying and salting. Desiccation (complete drying) is commonly used to preserve fish such as cod. Partial drying and salting are popular for the preservation of fish like herring and mackerel. Fish such as salmon, tuna, and herring are cooked and canned. Most fish are filleted before canning, but some small fish (e.g. sardines) are only decapitated and gutted before canning.[53]

Consumption

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
See also: List of countries by seafood consumption and Fishing industry by country
Seafood is consumed all over the world; it provides the world's prime source of high-quality protein: 14–16% of the animal protein consumed worldwide; over one billion people rely on seafood as their primary source of animal protein.[54][55] Fish is among the most common food allergens.

Since 1960, annual global seafood consumption has more than doubled to over 20 kg per capita. Among the top consumers are Korea (78.5 kg per head), Norway (66.6 kg) and Portugal (61.5 kg).[56]

The UK Food Standards Agency recommends that at least two portions of seafood should be consumed each week, one of which should be oil-rich. There are over 100 different types of seafood available around the coast of the UK.

Oil-rich fish such as mackerel or herring are rich in long chain Omega-3 oils. These oils are found in every cell of the human body, and are required for human biological functions such as brain functionality.

Whitefish such as haddock and cod are very low in fat and calories which, combined with oily fish rich in Omega-3 such as mackerel, sardines, fresh tuna, salmon and trout, can help to protect against coronary heart disease, as well as helping to develop strong bones and teeth.

Shellfish are particularly rich in zinc, which is essential for healthy skin and muscles as well as fertility. Casanova reputedly ate 50 oysters a day.[57][58]

Texture and taste
Over 33,000 species of fish and many more marine invertebrate species have been identified.[59] Bromophenols, which are produced by marine algae, give marine animals an odor and taste that is absent from freshwater fish and invertebrates. Also, a chemical substance called dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) that is found in red and green algae is transferred into animals in the marine food chain. When broken down, dimethyl sulfide (DMS) is produced, and is often released during food preparation when fresh fish and shellfish are heated. In small quantities it creates a specific smell one associates with the ocean, but in larger quantities gives the impression of rotten seaweed and old fish.[60] Another molecule known as TMAO occurs in fishes and gives them a distinct smell. It also exists in freshwater species, but becomes more numerous in the cells of an animal the deeper it lives, so fish from the deeper parts of the ocean have a stronger taste than species that live in shallow water.[61] Eggs from seaweed contain sex pheromones called dictyopterenes, which are meant to attract the sperm. These pheromones are also found in edible seaweeds, which contributes to their aroma.[62]

Common species used as seafood[63]
Mild flavour	Moderate flavour	Full flavour
Delicate
texture	basa, flounder, hake, scup, smelt, rainbow trout, hardshell clam, blue crab, peekytoe crab, spanner crab, cuttlefish, eastern oyster, Pacific oyster	anchovy, herring, lingcod, moi, orange roughy, Atlantic Ocean perch, Lake Victoria perch, yellow perch, European oyster, sea urchin	Atlantic mackerel
Medium
texture	black sea bass, European sea bass, hybrid striped bass, bream, cod, drum, haddock, hoki, Alaska pollock, rockfish, pink salmon, snapper, tilapia, turbot, walleye, lake whitefish, wolffish, hardshell clam, surf clam, cockle, Jonah crab, snow crab, crayfish, bay scallop, Chinese white shrimp	sablefish, Atlantic salmon, coho salmon, skate, dungeness crab, king crab, blue mussel, greenshell mussel, pink shrimp	escolar, chinook salmon, chum salmon, American shad
Firm
texture	Arctic char, carp, catfish, dory, grouper, halibut, monkfish, pompano, Dover sole, sturgeon, tilefish, wahoo, yellowtail, Abalone, conch, stone crab, American lobster, spiny lobster, octopus, black tiger shrimp, freshwater shrimp, gulf shrimp, Pacific white shrimp, squid	barramundi, cusk, dogfish, kingklip, mahimahi, opah, mako shark, swordfish, albacore tuna, yellowfin tuna, geoduck clam, squat lobster, sea scallop, rock shrimp	barracuda, Chilean sea bass, cobia, croaker, eel, blue marlin, mullet, sockeye salmon, bluefin tuna
Health benefits

The US FDA recommends moderate consumption of fish as part of a healthy and balanced diet.
There is broad scientific consensus that docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) found in seafood are beneficial to neurodevelopment and cognition, especially at young ages.[64][65] The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization has described fish as "nature's super food."[66] Seafood consumption is associated with improved neurologic development during pregnancy[67][68] and early childhood[69] and is more tenuously linked to reduced mortality from coronary heart disease.[70]

Fish consumption has been associated with a decreased risk of dementia, lung cancer and stroke.[71][72][73] A 2020 umbrella review concluded that fish consumption reduces all-cause mortality, cancer, cardiovascular disease, stroke and other outcomes. The review suggested that two to four servings per week is generally safe.[74] However, two other recent umbrella reviews have found no statistically significant associations between fish consumption and cancer risks and have cautioned researchers when it comes to interpreting reported associations between fish consumption and cancer risks because the quality of evidence is very low.[75][76]

The parts of fish containing essential fats and micronutrients, often cited as primary health benefits of eating seafood, are frequently discarded in the developed world.[77] Micronutrients including calcium, potassium, selenium, zinc, and iodine are found in their highest concentrations in the head, intestines, bones, and scales.[78]

Government recommendations promote moderate consumption of fish. The US Food and Drug Administration recommends moderate (4 oz for children and 8–12 oz for adults, weekly) consumption of fish as part of a healthy and balanced diet.[79] The UK National Health Service gives similar advice, recommending at least 2 portions (about 10 oz) of fish weekly.[80] The Chinese National Health Commission recommends slightly more, advising 10–20 oz of fish weekly.[81]

Health hazards
See also: Health hazards of eating fish and Mercury in fish

Barracuda found in Florida are avoided due to a high risk of ciguatera. The same fish found in Belize presents a lesser risk due to the lower prevalence of ciguatera-causing dinoflagellates in the Caribbean. Thus, knowing a fish's origin and life history is essential to determining its health hazards.

Organic and inorganic compounds including methylmercury, microplastics, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) can bioaccumulate to dangerous levels in apex predators like swordfish and marlin.
There are numerous factors to consider when evaluating health hazards in seafood. These concerns include marine toxins, microbes, foodborne illness, radionuclide contamination, and man-made pollutants.[77] Shellfish are among the more common food allergens.[82] Most of these dangers can be mitigated or avoided with accurate knowledge of when and where seafood is caught. However, consumers have limited access to relevant and actionable information in this regard and the seafood industry's systemic problems with mislabelling make decisions about what is safe even more fraught.[83]

Ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP) is an illness resulting from consuming toxins produced by dinoflagellates which bioaccumulate in the liver, roe, head, and intestines of reef fish.[84] It is the most common disease associated with seafood consumption and poses the greatest risk to consumers.[77] The population of plankton that produces these toxins varies significantly over time and location, as seen in red tides. Evaluating the risk of ciguatera in any given fish requires specific knowledge of its origin and life history, information that is often inaccurate or unavailable.[85] While ciguatera is relatively widespread compared to other seafood-related health hazards (up to 50,000 people suffer from ciguatera every year), mortality is very low.[86]

Scombroid food poisoning, is also a seafood illness. It is typically caused by eating fish high in histamine from being stored or processed improperly.[87]



Fish and shellfish have a natural tendency to concentrate inorganic and organic toxins and pollutants in their bodies, including methylmercury, a highly toxic organic compound of mercury, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and microplastics. Species of fish that are high on the food chain, such as shark, swordfish, king mackerel, albacore tuna, and tilefish contain higher concentrations of these bioaccumulates. This is because bioaccumulates are stored in the muscle tissues of fish, and when a predatory fish eats another fish, it assumes the entire body burden of bioaccumulates in the consumed fish. Thus species that are high on the food chain amass body burdens of bioaccumulates that can be ten times higher than the species they consume. This process is called biomagnification.[88]

Man-made disasters can cause localized hazards in seafood which may spread widely via piscine food chains. The first occurrence of widespread mercury poisoning in humans occurred this way in the 1950s in Minamata, Japan. Wastewater from a nearby chemical factory released methylmercury that accumulated in fish which were consumed by humans. Severe mercury poisoning is now known as Minamata disease.[89][77] The 2011 Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant disaster and 1947 – 1991 Marshall Islands nuclear bomb testing led to dangerous radionuclide contamination of local sea life which, in the latter case, remained as of 2008.[90][77]

A widely cited study in JAMA which synthesized government and MEDLINE reports, and meta-analyses to evaluate risks from methylmercury, dioxins, and polychlorinated biphenyls to cardiovascular health and links between fish consumption and neurologic outcomes concluded that:

"The benefits of modest fish consumption (1-2 servings/wk) outweigh the risks among adults and, excepting a few selected fish species, among women of childbearing age. Avoidance of modest fish consumption due to confusion regarding risks and benefits could result in thousands of excess CHD [congenital heart disease] deaths annually and suboptimal neurodevelopment in children."[70]

Mislabelling
Main article: Seafood mislabelling

Escolar is sometimes difficult to distinguish from tuna when cooked. Unlike tuna, escolar is associated with keriorrhea and severe cramping following consumption.[91] In many restaurants, most fish labeled as tuna, white tuna, or albacore are mislabeled escolar.[92][93]
Due to the wide array of options in the seafood marketplace, seafood is far more susceptible to mislabeling than terrestrial food.[77] There are more than 1,700 species of seafood in the United States' consumer marketplace, 80 – 90% of which are imported and less than 1% of which are tested for fraud.[92] However, more recent research into seafood imports and consumption patterns among consumers in the United States suggests that 35%-38% of seafood products are of domestic origin.[94] consumption suggests Estimates of mislabelled seafood in the United States range from 33% in general up to 86% for particular species.[92]

Byzantine supply chains, frequent bycatch, brand naming, species substitution, and inaccurate ecolabels all contribute to confusion for the consumer.[95] A 2013 study by Oceana found that one third of seafood sampled from the United States was incorrectly labeled.[92] Snapper and tuna were particularly susceptible to mislabelling, and seafood substitution was the most common type of fraud. Another type of mislabelling is short-weighting, where practices such as overglasing or soaking can misleadingly increase the apparent weight of the fish.[96] For supermarket shoppers, many seafood products are unrecognisable fillets. Without sophisticated DNA testing, there is no foolproof method to identify a fish species without their head, skin, and fins. This creates easy opportunities to substitute cheap products for expensive ones, a form of economic fraud.[97]

Beyond financial concerns, significant health risks arise from hidden pollutants and marine toxins in an already fraught marketplace. Seafood fraud has led to widespread keriorrhea due to mislabeled escolar, mercury poisoning from products marketed as safe for pregnant women, and hospitalisation and neurological damage due to mislabeled pufferfish.[93] For example, a 2014 study published in PLOS One found that 15% of MSC certified Patagonian toothfish originated from uncertified and mercury polluted fisheries. These fishery-stock substitutions had 100% more mercury than their genuine counterparts, "vastly exceeding" limits in Canada, New Zealand, and Australia.[98]

Sustainability
See also: Overfishing, Sustainable seafood, and Sustainable seafood advisory lists and certification
Research into population trends of various species of seafood is pointing to a global collapse of seafood species by 2048. Such a collapse would occur due to pollution and overfishing, threatening oceanic ecosystems, according to some researchers.[99]

A major international scientific study released in November 2006 in the journal Science found that about one-third of all fishing stocks worldwide have collapsed (with a collapse being defined as a decline to less than 10% of their maximum observed abundance), and that if current trends continue all fish stocks worldwide will collapse within fifty years.[100] In July 2009, Boris Worm of Dalhousie University, the author of the November 2006 study in Science, co-authored an update on the state of the world's fisheries with one of the original study's critics, Ray Hilborn of the University of Washington at Seattle. The new study found that through good fisheries management techniques even depleted fish stocks can be revived and made commercially viable again.[101] An analysis published in August 2020 indicates that seafood could theoretically increase sustainably by 36–74% by 2050 compared to current yields and that whether or not these production potentials are realised sustainably depends on several factors "such as policy reforms, technological innovation, and the extent of future shifts in demand".[102][103]

The FAO State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2004 report estimates that in 2003, of the main fish stocks or groups of resources for which assessment information is available, "approximately one-quarter were overexploited, depleted or recovering from depletion (16%, 7% and 1% respectively) and needed rebuilding."[104]

The National Fisheries Institute, a trade advocacy group representing the United States seafood industry, disagree. They claim that currently observed declines in fish populations are due to natural fluctuations and that enhanced technologies will eventually alleviate whatever impact humanity is having on oceanic life.[105]

In religion
See also: Kosher seafood
For the most part Islamic dietary laws allow the eating of seafood, though the Hanbali forbid eels, the Shafi forbid frogs and crocodiles, and the Hanafi forbid bottom feeders such as shellfish and carp.[106] The Jewish laws of Kashrut forbid the eating of shellfish and eels.[107] In the Old Testament, the Mosaic Covenant allowed the Israelites to eat Finfish, but shellfish and eels were an abomination and not allowed.[108]

In the New Testament, Luke's gospel reports Jesus' eating of a fish after his resurrection,[109] and in John 21, also a post-resurrection scene, Jesus tells his disciples where they can catch fish, before cooking breakfast for them to eat.[110]

Pescatarianism was widespread in the early Christian Church, among both the clergy and laity.[111] In ancient and medieval times, the Catholic Church forbade the practice of eating meat, eggs and dairy products during Lent. Thomas Aquinas argued that these "afford greater pleasure as food [than fish], and greater nourishment to the human body, so that from their consumption there results in a greater surplus available for seminal matter, which when abundant becomes a great incentive to lust".[112] In the United States, the Catholic practice of abstaining from meat on Fridays during Lent has popularised the Friday fish fry,[113] and parishes often sponsor a fish fry during Lent.[114] In predominantly Roman Catholic areas, restaurants may adjust their menus during Lent by adding seafood items to the menu.[115]

See also
icon	Food portal
icon	Oceans portal
Cold chain
Culinary name
Fish as food
Fish processing
Fish market
Friend of the Sea
Got Mercury?
Jellyfish as food
List of fish dishes
List of foods
List of harvested aquatic animals by weight
List of seafood companies
List of seafood dishes
List of seafood restaurants
Oyster bar
Raw bar
Safe Harbor Certified Seafood
Seafood pizza
Seafood Watch, sustainable consumer guide (USA)
References
Citations
 Fish and seafood consumption Our World in Data
 Inman, Mason (17 October 2007). "African Cave Yields Earliest Proof of Beach Living". National Geographic News. Archived from the original on 18 October 2007.
 African Bone Tools Dispute Key Idea About Human Evolution National Geographic News article.
 "Neanderthals ate shellfish 150,000 years ago: study". Phys.org. 15 September 2011.
 Yaowu Hu, Y; Hong Shang, H; Haowen Tong, H; Olaf Nehlich, O; Wu Liu, W; Zhao, C; Yu, J; Wang, C; Trinkaus, E; Richards, M (2009). "Stable isotope dietary analysis of the Tianyuan 1 early modern human". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 106 (27): 10971–10974. Bibcode:2009PNAS..10610971H. doi:10.1073/pnas.0904826106. PMC 2706269. PMID 19581579.
 First direct evidence of substantial fish consumption by early modern humans in China PhysOrg.com, 6 July 2009.
 Coastal Shell Middens and Agricultural Origins in Atlantic Europe.
 "Fisheries history: Gift of the Nile" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2006.
 Based on data extracted from the FAO FishStat database 22 July 2012.
 Dalby, p.67.
 Image of fishing illustrated in a Roman mosaic Archived 17 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
 Adamson (2002), p. 11.
 Adamson (2004), pp. 45–39.
 "ASFIS List of Species for Fishery Statistics Purposes". Fishery Fact Sheets. Food and Agriculture Organization. Retrieved 22 July 2012.
 Total production, both wild and aquaculture, of seafood species groups in thousand tonnes, sourced from the data reported in the FAO FishStat database
 Walrond C Carl . "Coastal fish – Fish of the open sea floor" Te Ara – the Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Updated 2 March 2009
 "Definition of calamari". Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary. 18 August 2023.
 * Rudloe, Jack and Rudloe, Anne (2009) Shrimp: The Endless Quest for Pink Gold FT Press. ISBN 9780137009725.
 Includes crabs, sea spiders, king crabs and squat lobsters
 Includes lobsters, spiny-rock lobsters
 Steven Nicol & Yoshinari Endo (1997). Krill Fisheries of the World. Fisheries Technical Paper. Vol. 367. Food and Agriculture Organization. ISBN 978-92-5-104012-6.
 "Brine Shrimp Artemia as a Direct Human Food" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2022.
 Pompa, S.; Ehrlich, P. R.; Ceballos, G. (2011). "Global distribution and conservation of marine mammals". PNAS. 108 (33): 13600–13605. Bibcode:2011PNAS..10813600P. doi:10.1073/pnas.1101525108. PMC 3158205. PMID 21808012.
 "Native Alaskans say oil drilling threatens way of life". BBC News. 20 July 2010. Retrieved 11 August 2010.
 Nguyen, Vi (26 November 2010). "Warning over contaminated whale meat as Faroe Islands' killing continues". The Ecologist.
 "Greenpeace: Stores, eateries less inclined to offer whale". The Japan Times Online. 8 March 2008. Retrieved 29 July 2010.
 Palmer, Brian (11 March 2010). "What Does Whale Taste Like?". Slate Magazine. Retrieved 29 July 2010.
 Kershaw 1988, p. 67
 Matsutani, Minoru (23 September 2009). "Details on how Japan's dolphin catches work". Japan Times. p. 3.
 "Eskimo Art, Inuit Art, Canadian Native Artwork, Canadian Aboriginal Artwork". Inuitarteskimoart.com. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2009.
 "Seal Hunt Facts". Sea Shepherd. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008. Retrieved 24 July 2011.
 Johnston, Eric (23 September 2009). "Mercury danger in dolphin meat". Japan Times. p. 3.
 Schafer, Edward H. (1962). "Eating Turtles in Ancient China". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 82 (1): 73–74. doi:10.2307/595986. JSTOR 595986.
 CITES (14 June 2006). "Appendices". Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna. Archived from the original (SHTML) on 3 February 2007. Retrieved 5 February 2007.
 Settle, Sam (1995). "Status of Nesting Populations of Sea Turtles in Thailand and Their Conservation". Marine Turtle Newsletter. 68: 8–13.
 International Union for the Conservation of Nature. "IUCN Red List of Endangered Species". Retrieved 12 April 2012.
 Ess, Charlie. "Wild product's versatility could push price beyond $2 for Alaska dive fleet". National Fisherman. Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 1 August 2008.
 Rogers-Bennett, Laura, "The Ecology of Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and Strongylocentrotus purpuratus" in John M. Lawrence, Edible sea urchins: biology and ecology, p. 410
 Alan Davidson, Oxford Companion to Food, s.v. sea urchin
 Lawrence, John M., "Sea Urchin Roe Cuisine" in John M. Lawrence, Edible sea urchins: biology and ecology
 Omori M, Nakano E (2001). "Jellyfish fisheries in southeast Asia". Hydrobiologia. 451 (1–3): 19–26. Bibcode:2001HyBio.451...19O. doi:10.1023/A:1011879821323. S2CID 6518460.
 Hsieh, Yun-Hwa P; Leong, F-M; Rudloe, J (2001). "Jellyfish as food". Hydrobiologia. 451 (1–3): 11–17. Bibcode:2001HyBio.451...11P. doi:10.1023/A:1011875720415. S2CID 20719121.
 Li, Jian-rong; Hsieh, Yun-Hwa P (2004). "Traditional Chinese food technology and cuisine" (PDF). Asia Pacific J Clin Nutr. 13 (2): 147–155. PMID 15228981.
 Smith, G.M. 1944. Marine Algae of the Monterey Peninsula, California. Stanford Univ., 2nd Edition.
 K.H. Wong; Peter C.K. Cheung (2000). "Nutritional evaluation of some subtropical red and green seaweeds: Part I – proximate composition, amino acid profiles and some physico-chemical properties". Food Chemistry. 71 (4): 475–482. doi:10.1016/S0308-8146(00)00175-8.
 "Seaweed as Human Food". Michael Guiry's Seaweed Site. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2011.
 "Spotlight presenters in a lather over laver". BBC. 25 May 2005. Retrieved 11 November 2011.
 N. Narain and Nunes, M.L. Marine Animal and Plant Products. In: Handbook of Meat, Poultry and Seafood Quality, L.M.L. Nollet and T. Boylston, eds. Blackwell Publishing 2007, p 247.
 "WO2005039280 - PROCESS FOR TRANSPORT OF LIVE FISH WITHOUT WATER". patentscope.wipo.int. Retrieved 15 May 2025.
 The World Resources Institute, The live reef fish trade Archived 7 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine
 "La Rosa Logistics Inc 14-Jan-03". Fda.gov. Retrieved 2 April 2012.
 Hicks, Doris T. (28 October 2016). "Seafood Safety and Quality: The Consumer's Role". Foods. 5 (4): 71. doi:10.3390/foods5040071. ISSN 2304-8158. PMC 5302431. PMID 28231165.
 Messina, Concetta Maria; Arena, Rosaria; Ficano, Giovanna; Randazzo, Mariano; Morghese, Maria; La Barbera, Laura; Sadok, Saloua; Santulli, Andrea (21 October 2021). "Effect of Cold Smoking and Natural Antioxidants on Quality Traits, Safety and Shelf Life of Farmed Meagre (Argyrosomus regius) Fillets, as a Strategy to Diversify Aquaculture Products". Foods. 10 (11): 2522. doi:10.3390/foods10112522. ISSN 2304-8158. PMC 8619432. PMID 34828803.
 World Health Organization [1].
 Tidwell, James H.; Allan, Geoff L. (2001). "Fish as food: aquaculture's contribution Ecological and economic impacts and contributions of fish farming and capture fisheries". EMBO Reports. 2 (11): 958–963. doi:10.1093/embo-reports/kve236. PMC 1084135. PMID 11713181.
 How much fish do we consume? First global seafood consumption footprint published European Commission science and knowledge service. Last update: 27/ September 2018.
 Slovenko R (2001) "Aphrodisiacs-Then and Now" Journal of Psychiatry and Law, 29: 103f.
 Patrick McMurray (2007). Consider the Oyster: A Shucker's Field Guide. St. Martin's Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-312-37736-6.
 FishBase: October 2017 update. Retrieved 30 December 2017.
 "The Science of Seaweeds | American Scientist". 6 February 2017.
 "BBC – Earth – What does it take to live at the bottom of the ocean?".
 "Why Does The Sea Smell Like The Sea? | Popular Science". 19 August 2014.
 Peterson, James and editors of Seafood Business (2009) Seafood Handbook: The Comprehensive Guide to Sourcing, Buying and Preparation John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780470404164.
 Harris, W S; Baack, M L (30 October 2014). "Beyond building better brains: bridging the docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) gap of prematurity". Journal of Perinatology. 35 (1): 1–7. doi:10.1038/jp.2014.195. ISSN 0743-8346. PMC 4281288. PMID 25357095.
 Hüppi, Petra S (1 March 2008). "Nutrition for the Brain: Commentary on the article by Isaacs et al. on page 308". Pediatric Research. 63 (3): 229–231. doi:10.1203/pdr.0b013e318168c6d1. ISSN 0031-3998. PMID 18287959. S2CID 6564743.
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2016b. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture: Contributing to Food Security and Nutrition for AIL Rome: FAO.
 Hibbeln, Joseph R; Davis, John M; Steer, Colin; Emmett, Pauline; Rogers, Imogen; Williams, Cathy; Golding, Jean (February 2007). "Maternal seafood consumption in pregnancy and neurodevelopmental outcomes in childhood (ALSPAC study): an observational cohort study". The Lancet. 369 (9561): 578–585. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(07)60277-3. ISSN 0140-6736. PMID 17307104. S2CID 35798591.
 Fewtrell, Mary S; Abbott, Rebecca A; Kennedy, Kathy; Singhal, Atul; Morley, Ruth; Caine, Eleanor; Jamieson, Cherry; Cockburn, Forrester; Lucas, Alan (April 2004). "Randomized, double-blind trial of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation with fish oil and borage oil in preterm infants". The Journal of Pediatrics. 144 (4): 471–479. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.01.034. ISSN 0022-3476. PMID 15069395.
 Daniels, Julie L.; Longnecker, Matthew P.; Rowland, Andrew S.; Golding, Jean (July 2004). "Fish Intake During Pregnancy and Early Cognitive Development of Offspring". Epidemiology. 15 (4): 394–402. doi:10.1097/01.ede.0000129514.46451.ce. ISSN 1044-3983. PMID 15232398. S2CID 22517733.
 Mozaffarian, Dariush; Rimm, Eric B. (18 October 2006). "Fish Intake, Contaminants, and Human Health". JAMA. 296 (15): 1885–99. doi:10.1001/jama.296.15.1885. ISSN 0098-7484. PMID 17047219.
 Song, Jian; Hong, Su; Wang, Bao-long; Zhou, Yang-yang; Guo, Liang-Liang (2014). "Fish Consumption and Lung Cancer Risk: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis". Nutrition and Cancer. 66 (44): 539–549. doi:10.1080/01635581.2014.894102. PMID 24707954. S2CID 38143108.
 Bakre AT, Chen R, Khutan R, Wei L, Smith T, Qin G, Danat IM, Zhou W, Schofield P, Clifford A, Wang J, Verma A, Zhang C, Ni J (2018). "Association between fish consumption and risk of dementia: a new study from China and a systematic literature review and meta-analysis". Public Health Nutrition. 21 (10): 1921–1932. doi:10.1017/S136898001800037X. PMC 10260768. PMID 29551101. S2CID 3983960.
 Zhao, Wei; Tang, Hui; Xiaodong, Yang; Xiaoquan, Luo; Wang, Xiaoya; Shao, Chuan; He, Jiaquan (2019). "Fish Consumption and Stroke Risk: A Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies". Journal of Stroke & Cerebrovascular Diseases. 28 (3): 604–611. doi:10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.10.036. PMID 30470619. S2CID 53719088.
 Li, Ni; Wu, Xiaoting; Zhuang, Wen; Xia, Lin; Chen, Yi; Wu, Chuncheng; Rao, Zhiyong; Du, Liang; Zhao, Rui; Yi, Mengshi; Wan, Qianyi; Zhou, Yong (2020). "Fish consumption and multiple health outcomes: Umbrella review". Trends in Food Science and Technology. 99: 273–283. doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2020.02.033. S2CID 216445490.
 Jayedi, Ahmad; Shab-Bidar, Sakineh (2020). "Fish Consumption and the Risk of Chronic Disease: An Umbrella Review of Meta-Analyses of Prospective Cohort Studies". Advances in Nutrition. 11 (5): 1123–1133. doi:10.1093/advances/nmaa029. PMC 7490170. PMID 32207773.
 Keum Hwa Lee, Hyo Jin Seong, Gaeun Kim, Gwang Hun Jeong, Jong Yeob Kim, Hyunbong Park, Eunyoung Jung, Andreas Kronbichler, Michael Eisenhut, Brendon Stubbs, Marco Solmi, Ai Koyanagi, Sung Hwi Hong, Elena Dragioti, Leandro Fórnias Machado de Rezende, Louis Jacob, NaNa Keum, Hans J van der Vliet, Eunyoung Cho, Nicola Veronese, Giuseppe Grosso, Shuji Ogino, Mingyang Song, Joaquim Radua, Sun Jae Jung, Trevor Thompson, Sarah E Jackson, Lee Smith, Lin Yang, Hans Oh, Eun Kyoung Choi, Jae Il Shin, Edward L Giovannucci, Gabriele Gamerith (2020). "Consumption of Fish and ω-3 Fatty Acids and Cancer Risk: An Umbrella Review of Meta-Analyses of Observational Studies". Advances in Nutrition. 11 (5): 1134–1149. doi:10.1093/advances/nmaa055. PMC 7490175. PMID 32488249.
 Hamada, Shingo; Wilk, Richard (2019). Seafood: Ocean to the Plate. New York: Routledge. pp. 2, 8, 5–7, 9, 5, 9, 115 (in order of parenthetical appearance). ISBN 9781138191860.
 "Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Risks and Benefits of Fish Consumption" (PDF). FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Report. 978: 25–29. January 2010. eISSN 2070-6987.
 "Advice About Eating Fish" (PDF). United States Environmental Protection Agency. July 2019. Retrieved 8 May 2020.
 "Fish and shellfish". nhs.uk. 27 April 2018. Retrieved 9 May 2020.
 "《中国居民膳食指南（2016）》核心推荐_中国居民膳食指南". dg.cnsoc.org. Retrieved 9 May 2020.
 "Common Food Allergens". Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Network. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 24 June 2007.
 Landrigan, Philip J.; Raps, Hervé; Cropper, Maureen; Bald, Caroline; Brunner, Manuel; Canonizado, Elvia Maya; Charles, Dominic; Chiles, Thomas C.; Donohue, Mary J.; Enck, Judith; Fenichel, Patrick; Fleming, Lora E.; Ferrier-Pages, Christine; Fordham, Richard; Gozt, Aleksandra (2023). "The Minderoo-Monaco Commission on Plastics and Human Health". Annals of Global Health. 89 (1): 23. doi:10.5334/aogh.4056. ISSN 2214-9996. PMC 10038118. PMID 36969097.
 Ansdell, Vernon (2019), "Seafood Poisoning", Travel Medicine, Elsevier, pp. 449–456, doi:10.1016/b978-0-323-54696-6.00049-5, ISBN 978-0-323-54696-6
 Brand, Larry E.; Campbell, Lisa; Bresnan, Eileen (February 2012). "Karenia: The biology and ecology of a toxic genus". Harmful Algae. 14: 156–178. Bibcode:2012HAlga..14..156B. doi:10.1016/j.hal.2011.10.020. ISSN 1568-9883. PMC 9891709. PMID 36733478.
 "Ciguatera Fish Poisoning—New York City, 2010-2011". JAMA. 309 (11): 1102. 20 March 2013. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.1523. ISSN 0098-7484.
 "Scombroid Fish Poisoning". California Department of Public Health. Retrieved 22 March 2024.
 Smith, Madeleine; Love, David C.; Rochman, Chelsea M.; Neff, Roni A. (2018). "Microplastics in Seafood and the Implications for Human Health". Current Environmental Health Reports. 5 (3): 375–386. Bibcode:2018CEHR....5..375S. doi:10.1007/s40572-018-0206-z. ISSN 2196-5412. PMC 6132564. PMID 30116998.
 Osiander, A. (1 October 2002). "Minamata: Pollution and the Struggle for Democracy in Postwar Japan, by Timothy S. George. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press, 2001, xxi + 385 pp., $45.00 (hardcover ISBN 0-674-00364-0), $25.00 (paperback ISBN 0-674-00785-9)". Social Science Japan Journal. 5 (2): 273–275. doi:10.1093/ssjj/05.2.273. ISSN 1369-1465.
 Johnston, Barbara Rose; Barker, Holly M. (26 March 2020). Consequential Damages of Nuclear War. doi:10.1201/9781315431819. ISBN 9781315431819. S2CID 241941148.
 Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (U.S.). The bad bug book : foodborne pathogenic microorganisms and natural toxins handbook (PDF). U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Center for Food Safety & Applied Nutrition. p. 237. LCCN 2004616584. OCLC 49526684.
 Kimberly Warner; Walker Timme; Beth Lowell; Michael Hirschfield (2013). Oceana study reveals seafood fraud nationwide. Oceana. OCLC 828208760.
 Willette, Demian A.; Simmonds, Sara E.; Cheng, Samantha H.; Esteves, Sofia; Kane, Tonya L.; Nuetzel, Hayley; Pilaud, Nicholas; Rachmawati, Rita; Barber, Paul H. (10 May 2017). "Using DNA barcoding to track seafood mislabeling in Los Angeles restaurants". Conservation Biology. 31 (5): 1076–1085. Bibcode:2017ConBi..31.1076W. doi:10.1111/cobi.12888. ISSN 0888-8892. PMID 28075039. S2CID 3788104.
 Gephart, Jessica A.; Froehlich, Halley E.; Branch, Trevor A. (2019). "Opinion: To create sustainable seafood industries, the United States needs a better accounting of imports and exports". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 116 (19): 9142–9146. doi:10.1073/pnas.1905650116. PMC 6511020. PMID 31068476.
 Jacquet, Jennifer L.; Pauly, Daniel (May 2008). "Trade secrets: Renaming and mislabeling of seafood". Marine Policy. 32 (3): 309–318. Bibcode:2008MarPo..32..309J. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.182.1143. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2007.06.007. ISSN 0308-597X.
 "FishWatch – Fraud". Retrieved 21 December 2018.
 Nutrition, Center for Food Safety and Applied (3 November 2018). "Seafood Species Substitution and Economic Fraud". FDA.
 Marko, Peter B.; Nance, Holly A.; van den Hurk, Peter (5 August 2014). "Seafood Substitutions Obscure Patterns of Mercury Contamination in Patagonian Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) or "Chilean Sea Bass"". PLOS ONE. 9 (8): e104140. Bibcode:2014PLoSO...9j4140M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0104140. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 4122487. PMID 25093736.
 World Seafood Supply Could Run Out by 2048 Researchers Warn boston.com. Retrieved 6 February 2007
 "'Only 50 years left' for sea fish", BBC News. 2 November 2006.
 Study Finds Hope in Saving Saltwater Fish The New York Times. Retrieved 4 August 2009
 "Food from the sea: Sustainably managed fisheries and the future". phys.org. Retrieved 6 September 2020.
 Costello, Christopher; Cao, Ling; Gelcich, Stefan; Cisneros-Mata, Miguel Á; Free, Christopher M.; Froehlich, Halley E.; Golden, Christopher D.; Ishimura, Gakushi; Maier, Jason; Macadam-Somer, Ilan; Mangin, Tracey; Melnychuk, Michael C.; Miyahara, Masanori; de Moor, Carryn L.; Naylor, Rosamond; Nøstbakken, Linda; Ojea, Elena; O’Reilly, Erin; Parma, Ana M.; Plantinga, Andrew J.; Thilsted, Shakuntala H.; Lubchenco, Jane (19 August 2020). "The future of food from the sea". Nature. 588 (7836): 95–100. Bibcode:2020Natur.588...95C. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2616-y. hdl:11093/1616. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32814903. S2CID 221179212.
 "The Status of the Fishing Fleet". The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture: 2004. Food and Agriculture Organization. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 22 May 2020.
 Seafood Could Collapse by 2050, Experts Warn, NBC News. Retrieved 22 July 2007.
 Is seafood Haram or Halal? Questions on Islam. Updated 23 December 2008. Retrieved 6 January 2013.
 Yoreh De'ah – Shulchan-Aruch Archived 3 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Chapter 1, torah.org. Retrieved 17 June 2012.
 "All that are in the waters: all that... hath not fins and scales ye may not eat" (Deuteronomy 14:9–10) and are "an abomination" (Leviticus 11:9–12).
 Luke 24:42
 John 21:1–14
 Walters, Kerry S.; Portmess, Lisa (31 May 2001). Religious Vegetarianism: From Hesiod to the Dalai Lama. SUNY Press. p. 124. ISBN 9780791490679.
 "Summa Theologica, Q147a8". Newadvent.org. Retrieved 27 August 2010.
 Walkup, Carolyn (8 December 2003). "You can take the girl out of Wisconsin, but the lure of its food remains". Nation's Restaurant News. Archived from the original on 11 July 2012. Retrieved 25 February 2009.
 Connie Mabin (2 March 2007). "For Lent, Parishes Lighten Up Fish Fry". Washington Post. Retrieved 25 February 2009.
 Carlino, Bill (19 February 1990). "Seafood promos aimed to 'lure' Lenten observers". Nation's Restaurant News. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 25 February 2009.
Sources
Adamson, Melitta Weiss (2004) Food in Medieval Times Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-32147-7.
Adamson, Melitta Weiss (2002) Regional Cuisines of Medieval Europe: A Book of Essays Routledge. ISBN 9780415929943.
Alasalvar C, Miyashita K, Shahidi F and Wanasundara U (2011) Handbook of Seafood Quality, Safety and Health Applications John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781444347760.
Athenaeus of Naucratis The Deipnosophists; or, Banquet of the learned Vol 3, Charles Duke Yonge (trans) 1854. H.G. Bohn.
Dalby, A. (1996) Siren Feasts: A History of Food and Gastronomy in Greece Routledge. ISBN 0-415-15657-2.
Granata LA, Flick GJ Jr and Martin RE (eds) (2012) The Seafood Industry: Species, Products, Processing, and Safety John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781118229538.
Green, Aliza (2007) Field Guide to Seafood: How to Identify, Select, and Prepare Virtually Every Fish and Shellfish at the Market Quirk Books. ISBN 9781594741357.
Kershaw, A. P. (1988). Northern environmental disturbances. Boreal Institute for Northern Studies, University of Alberta. ISBN 978-091-905869-9.
McGee, Harold (2004) On Food And Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9780684800011.
Peterson, James and editors of Seafood Business (2009) Seafood Handbook: The Comprehensive Guide to Sourcing, Buying and Preparation John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780470404164.
Potter, Jeff (2010) Cooking for Geeks: Real Science, Great Hacks, and Good Food O'Reilly Media. ISBN 9780596805883.
Silverstein, Alvin; Silverstein, Virginia B. & Silverstein, Robert A. (1995). The Sea Otter. Brookfield, Connecticut: The Millbrook Press, Inc. ISBN 978-1-56294-418-6. OCLC 30436543.
Regensteinn J M and Regensteinn C E (2000) "Religious food laws and the seafood industry" In: R E Martin, E P Carter, G J Flick Jr and L M Davis (Eds) (2000) Marine and freshwater products handbook, CRC Press. ISBN 9781566768894.
Snodgrass, Mary Ellen (2004) Encyclopedia of Kitchen History ISBN 9781579583804.
Stickney, Robert (2009) Aquaculture: An Introductory Text CABI. ISBN 9781845935894.
Tidwell, James H.; Allan, Geoff L. (2001). "Fish as food: aquaculture's contribution Ecological and economic impacts and contributions of fish farming and capture fisheries". EMBO Reports. 2 (11): 958–963. doi:10.1093/embo-reports/kve236. PMC 1084135. PMID 11713181.
Further reading
Alasalvar C, Miyashita K, Shahidi F and Wanasundara U (2011) Handbook of Seafood Quality, Safety and Health Applications, John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781444347760.
Ainsworth, Mark (2009) Fish and Seafood: Identification, Fabrication, Utilization Cengage Learning. ISBN 9781435400368.
Anderson, James L (2003) The International Seafood Trade Woodhead Publishing. ISBN 9781855734562.
Babal, Ken (2010) Seafood Sense: The Truth about Seafood Nutrition and Safety ReadHowYouWant.com. ISBN 9781458755995.
Botana, Luis M (2000) Seafood and Freshwater Toxins: Pharmacology, Physiology and Detection CRC Press. ISBN 9780824746339.
Boudreaux, Edmond (2011) The Seafood Capital of the World: Biloxi's Maritime History The History Press. ISBN 9781609492847.
Granata LA, Martin RE and Flick GJ Jr (2012) The Seafood Industry: Species, Products, Processing, and Safety John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781118229538.
Greenberg, Paul (2015). American Catch: The Fight for Our Local Seafood. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0143127437.
Luten, Joop B (Ed.) (2006) Seafood Research From Fish To Dish: Quality, Safety and Processing of Wild and Farmed Fish Wageningen Academic Pub. ISBN 9789086860050.
McDermott, Ryan (2007) Toward a More Efficient Seafood Consumption Advisory ProQuest. ISBN 9780549183822.
Nesheim MC and Yaktine AL (Eds) (2007) Seafood Choices: Balancing Benefits and Risks National Academies Press. ISBN 9780309102186.
Shames, Lisa (2011) Seafood Safety: FDA Needs to Improve Oversight of Imported Seafood and Better Leverage Limited Resources DIANE Publishing. ISBN 9781437985948.
Robson, A. (2006). "Shellfish view of omega-3 and sustainable fisheries". Nature. 444 (7122): 1002. Bibcode:2006Natur.444.1002R. doi:10.1038/4441002d.
Trewin C and Woolfitt A (2006) Cornish Fishing and Seafood Alison Hodge Publishers. ISBN 9780906720424.
UNEP (2009) The Role of Supply Chains in Addressing the Global Seafood Crisis UNEP/Earthprint
Upton, Harold F (2011) Seafood Safety: Background Issues DIANE Publishing. ISBN 9781437943832.
External links

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seafood.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Seafood.

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Seafood.
Wikibooks Cookbook
vte
Seafood
Fish	
AnchovyBarramundiBillfishCarpCatfishCodEelFlatfishFlounderHerringMackerelSalmonSardineSharkSturgeonSwordfishTilapiaTroutTunaWhitebait
Shellfish	
AbaloneCocklesConchCrabCrayfishGeoduckKrillLobsterMusselsOystersPrawn/ShrimpScallopsSea urchinsCrustaceansMolluscs
Other seafood	
JellyfishMarine mammals WhaleOctopusSea cucumberSeaweedSquidAlgaeList of seafoods more...
Processed
seafood	
CaviarDried fishCanned fishCod liver oilCured fishFermented fishFish filletFish headFish oilFish sauceFish pasteFish steakFish stockLutefiskSalted fishSalted squidShark liver oilShrimp pasteSmoked fishStockfishSurimiRoe more...
Seafood dishes	
List of seafood dishesList of crab dishesList of fish dishesList of raw fish dishesList of tuna dishesBisqueChowderFish and chipsFish pieFish soupFried fishSeafood boilShark fin soupSushiSushi bake more...
Health hazards	
CiguateraFish diseases and parasitesMercury in fishMetagonimiasisScombroid food poisoningShellfish poisoning
Advisory services	
Seafood mislabellingSustainable seafoodSustainable seafood advisory lists and certification
Animal welfare	
Declawing of crabsEyestalk ablationEating live seafoodGoldfish swallowingLive fish tradePain in fishPain in crustaceansShark finning
Related topics	
Fish preservationFish processingGathering seafood by handHistory of seafoodHistory of sushiList of seafood companiesPescetarianismRaw barSalmon cannerySeafood restaurant
icon Food portal Category: Seafood
vte
Edible mollusks
vte
Edible crustaceans
vte
Dried fish and dried seafood
vte
Meat
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
GermanyCzech RepublicIsrael
Categories: SeafoodMeat
This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 22:43 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Seafood

54 languages
Add topic



WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Life and career

Death

Legacy
Philanthropy and humanitarian work
Artistry

Honors and awards
Earnings
Discography
Filmography
Tours
See also
Notes
References

Further reading
External links
Michael Jackson

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Featured article
Extended-protected article
Listen to this article
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"King of Pop" redirects here. For other uses, see King of Pop (disambiguation) and Michael Jackson (disambiguation).
Michael Jackson
Black-and-white photo of Jackson posing for a photo
Jackson in 1983
Born	Michael Joseph Jackson
August 29, 1958
Gary, Indiana, US
Died	June 25, 2009 (aged 50)
Los Angeles, California, US
Cause of death	Cardiac arrest caused by acute propofol intoxication
Burial place	Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale, California, US
Other names	Michael Joe Jackson
Occupations	
Singersongwriterdancerphilanthropistrecord producer
Spouses	
Lisa Marie Presley
​
​(m. 1994; div. 1996)​
Debbie Rowe
​
​(m. 1996; div. 2000)​
Children	3
Parents	
Joe Jackson
Katherine Jackson
Family	Jackson family
Awards	Full list
Musical career
Genres	
PopsoulR&Bfunkrockdiscopost-discodance-popnew jack swing
Instrument	Vocals
Discography	
Albumssinglessongs
Years active	1964–2009
Labels	
SteeltownMotownEpicLegacySonyMJJ Productions
Formerly of	The Jackson 5
Website	michaeljackson.com
Signature

Michael Joseph Jackson (August 29, 1958 – June 25, 2009) was an American singer, songwriter, dancer, and philanthropist. Dubbed the "King of Pop", he is regarded as one of the most culturally significant figures of the 20th century. Over a four-decade career, his music achievements broke racial barriers in America and made him a dominant figure across the world. Through songs, stages, and fashion, he proliferated visual performance for artists in popular music; popularizing street dance moves including the moonwalk, the robot, and the anti-gravity lean. Jackson is often deemed the greatest entertainer of all time based on his acclaim and records.[1]

The eighth child of the Jackson family, Michael made his public debut in 1964 at age six, as a member of the Jackson 5 (later known as the Jacksons). After signing with Motown in 1968, the band achieved worldwide success with him as its lead singer. Jackson achieved solo stardom with the release of his fifth album Off the Wall (1979). He followed it up with Thriller (1982), the best-selling album of all time, which catapulted him to a rare level of fame, whilst aiding in the popularization of MTV and revolutionizing the music video medium with the videos for its title track along with "Beat It" and "Billie Jean". Jackson furthered his position as a global superstar with Bad (1987), the world's best-selling album of both 1987 and 1988, as well as the first album to produce five US Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles: "I Just Can't Stop Loving You", "Bad", "The Way You Make Me Feel", "Man in the Mirror", and "Dirty Diana". Dangerous (1991) marked a new era for Jackson, lauded as his most artistic and socially conscious album. HIStory (1995) produced "You Are Not Alone", the first song to debut at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100. His final album, Invincible, was released in 2001.

From the late 1980s, Jackson became a figure of controversy and speculation due to his changing appearance, relationships, behavior, and lifestyle. He was accused of sexually abusing the child of a family friend in 1993. In 2005, Jackson was tried and acquitted of further child sexual abuse allegations and all other charges. While preparing for This Is It (a series of comeback concerts), Jackson died in 2009 from an overdose of propofol administered by his personal physician Conrad Murray, who was convicted in 2011 of involuntary manslaughter. Jackson's death triggered reactions around the world, creating unprecedented surges of internet traffic and a spike in sales of his music. His televised memorial service, held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, was estimated to have been viewed by more than 2.5 billion people.

Jackson is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, with estimated sales of over 500 million records worldwide.[nb 1] He had 13 Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles (the fourth-highest in Hot 100 history) and is the first artist to have a top-ten single on the chart in five different decades. Jackson was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (twice), the National Rhythm & Blues Hall of Fame, the Vocal Group Hall of Fame, the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Dance Hall of Fame (the only recording artist to be inducted). One of the most-awarded artists in popular music, his accolades include 13 Grammy Awards, the Grammy Legend Award, and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award; 26 American Music Awards, including Artist of the Century; 12 World Music Awards; six Brit Awards; the Bambi Pop Artist of the Millennium Award; and three presidential honors. In 1992, Jackson founded Heal the World Foundation, donating an estimated $500 million to charity throughout his lifetime. In 2024, half of his music catalogue sold to Sony for $600 million, the largest music acquisition for a single artist in history.

Life and career
Early life and the Jackson 5 (1958–1975)
The single-story house has white walls, two windows, a central white door with a black door frame, and a black roof. In front of the house there is a walkway and multiple colored flowers and memorabilia.
Jackson's childhood home in Gary, Indiana, pictured in July 2009
Michael Joseph Jackson[4][5] was born in Gary, Indiana, on August 29, 1958.[6][7] He was the eighth of ten children in the Jackson family, a working-class African-American family living in a two-bedroom house on Jackson Street.[8][9] His mother, Katherine Esther Jackson (née Scruse), played clarinet and piano, had aspired to be a country-and-western performer, and worked part-time at Sears.[10] She was a Jehovah's Witness.[11] His father, Joseph Walter "Joe" Jackson, was a former boxer, crane operator at US Steel, and guitarist for local rhythm and blues band the Falcons.[12][13] Joe's great-grandfather, July "Jack" Gale, was a US Army scout; family lore held that he was also a Native American medicine man.[14] Michael grew up with three sisters (Rebbie, La Toya, and Janet) and five brothers (Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, Marlon, and Randy).[12] A sixth brother, Marlon's twin Brandon, died shortly after his birth.[15]

In 1964, Michael and Marlon joined the Jackson Brothers—a band formed by their father which included Jackie, Tito and Jermaine—as backup musicians playing congas and tambourine.[16][17] Michael said his father told him he had a "fat nose",[18] and physically and emotionally abused him during rehearsals. He recalled that Joe often sat in a chair with a belt in his hand as he and his siblings rehearsed, ready to punish any mistakes.[11][19] Joe acknowledged that he regularly whipped Michael.[20] Katherine said that although whipping came to be considered abuse, it was a common way to discipline children when Michael was growing up.[21][22] Jackie, Tito, Jermaine and Marlon denied that their father was abusive and said that the whippings, which had a deeper impact on Michael because he was younger, kept them disciplined and out of trouble.[23] Michael said that during his youth he was lonely and isolated.[24]

Later in 1965, Michael began sharing lead vocals with Jermaine, and the group's name was changed to the Jackson 5.[25] In 1965, the group won a talent show; Michael performed the dance to Robert Parker's 1965 song "Barefootin'" and sang the Temptations' "My Girl".[26] From 1966 to 1968, the Jacksons 5 toured the Midwest; they frequently played at a string of black clubs known as the Chitlin' Circuit as the opening act for artists such as Sam & Dave, the O'Jays, Gladys Knight and Etta James. The Jackson 5 also performed at clubs and cocktail lounges, where striptease shows were featured, and at local auditoriums and high school dances.[27][28] In August 1967, while touring the East Coast, they won a weekly amateur night concert at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.[29]



Jackson in 1969 (left) and as a teenager in 1974
The Jackson 5 recorded several songs for a Gary record label, Steeltown Records; their first single, "Big Boy", was released in 1968.[30] Bobby Taylor of Bobby Taylor & the Vancouvers brought the Jackson 5 to Motown after they opened for Taylor at Chicago's Regal Theater in 1968. Taylor produced some of their early Motown recordings, including a version of "Who's Lovin' You".[31] After signing with Motown, the Jackson family relocated to Los Angeles.[32] In 1969, Motown executives decided Diana Ross should introduce the Jackson 5 to the public — partly to bolster her career in television — sending off what was considered Motown's last product of its "production line".[33] The Jackson 5 made their first television appearance in 1969 in the Miss Black America pageant, performing a cover of "It's Your Thing".[34] Rolling Stone later described the young Michael as "a prodigy" with "overwhelming musical gifts" who "quickly emerged as the main draw and lead singer".[35]


Michael Jackson (center) as a member of the Jackson 5 in 1972. The group were among the first African American performers to attain a large following.[36]
In January 1970, "I Want You Back" became the first Jackson 5 song to reach number one on the US Billboard Hot 100; it stayed there for four weeks. Three more singles with Motown topped the chart: "ABC", "The Love You Save", and "I'll Be There".[37] In May 1971, the Jackson family moved into a large house at Hayvenhurst, a 2-acre (0.81 ha) estate in Encino, California.[38] During this period, Michael developed from a child performer into a teen idol.[39] Between 1972 and 1975, he released four solo studio albums with Motown: Got to Be There (1972), Ben (1972), Music & Me (1973) and Forever, Michael (1975).[40] "Got to Be There" and "Ben", the title tracks from his first two solo albums, sold well as singles, as did a cover of Bobby Day's "Rockin' Robin".[41]

Michael maintained ties to the Jackson 5.[40] The Jackson 5 were later described as "a cutting-edge example of black crossover artists".[42] They were frustrated by Motown's refusal to allow them creative input.[43] Jackson's performance of their top five single "Dancing Machine" on Soul Train popularized the robot dance.[44][45]

Move to Epic and Off the Wall (1975–1981)

Jackson (left) and Quincy Jones (right) appear with Diana Ross on her upcoming special, Diana, in March 1981.
The Jackson 5 left Motown in 1975, signing with Epic Records and renaming themselves the Jacksons.[46] Their younger brother Randy joined the band around this time; Jermaine stayed with Motown and pursued a solo career.[47] The Jacksons continued to tour internationally, and released six more albums between 1976 and 1984. Michael, the group's main songwriter during this time, wrote songs such as "Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)" (1978), "This Place Hotel" (1980), and "Can You Feel It" (1980).[48]

In 1977, Jackson moved to New York City to star as the Scarecrow in The Wiz, a musical film directed by Sidney Lumet, alongside Diana Ross, Nipsey Russell, and Ted Ross.[49] The film was a box-office failure.[50] Its score was arranged by Quincy Jones,[51] who later produced three of Jackson's solo albums.[52] During his time in New York, Jackson frequented the Studio 54 nightclub, where he heard early hip hop; this influenced his beatboxing on future tracks such as "Working Day and Night".[53] In 1978, Jackson felt unsatisfied with his nose, and decided to have a rhinoplasty.[54] He was referred to Steven Hoefflin, who performed his operations.[55]

Jackson's fifth solo album and first album as an adult, Off the Wall (1979), established him as a solo performer and helped him move from the bubblegum pop of his youth to more complex sounds.[39] It produced four top 10 entries in the US: "Off the Wall", "She's Out of My Life", and the chart-topping singles "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough" and "Rock with You".[56] The album reached number three on the US Billboard 200 and sold over 20 million copies worldwide.[57] In 1980, Jackson won three American Music Awards for his solo work: Favorite Soul/R&B Album, Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist, and Favorite Soul/R&B Single for "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough".[58][59] He also won a Grammy Award for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance for 1979 with "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough".[60] In 1981, Jackson was the American Music Awards winner for Favorite Soul/R&B Album and Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist.[61]

Jackson felt Off the Wall should have made a bigger impact, and was determined to exceed expectations with his next release.[62] In 1980, he secured the highest royalty rate in the music industry: 37 percent of wholesale album profit.[63]

Thriller and Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever and Pepsi incident (1982–1984)
Jackson recorded with Queen's lead singer Freddie Mercury from 1981 to 1983, recording demos of "State of Shock", "Victory" and "There Must Be More to Life Than This". The recordings were intended for an album of duets but, according to Queen's manager Jim Beach, the relationship soured when Jackson brought a llama into the recording studio,[64] and Jackson was upset by Mercury's drug use.[65] "There Must Be More to Life Than This" was released in 2014.[66] Jackson went on to record "State of Shock" with Mick Jagger for the Jacksons' album Victory (1984).[67]

In 1982, Jackson contributed "Someone in the Dark" to the audiobook for the film E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial. Jackson's sixth album, Thriller, was released in late 1982. It was the bestselling album worldwide in 1983,[68][69] and became the bestselling album of all time in the US[70] and the best-selling album of all time worldwide, selling an estimated 70 million copies.[71][72] It topped the Billboard 200 chart for 37 weeks and was in the top 10 of the 200 for 80 consecutive weeks. It was the first album to produce seven Billboard Hot 100 top-10 singles, including "Billie Jean", "Beat It", and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'".[73]

A sparkly jacket and gloves, displayed inside a transparent vertical tube.
The sequined jacket and white glove worn by Jackson at Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever
On March 25, 1983, Jackson reunited with his brothers for Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever, an NBC television special. The show aired on May 16 to an estimated audience of 47 million, and featured the Jacksons and other Motown stars.[74] Jackson's solo performance of "Billie Jean" earned him his first Emmy Award nomination.[75] Wearing a glove decorated with rhinestones,[76] he debuted his moonwalk dance, which Jeffrey Daniel had taught him three years earlier, and it became his signature dance in his repertoire.[77] Jackson had originally turned down the invitation to the show, believing he had been doing too much television. But at the request of Motown founder Berry Gordy, he performed in exchange for an opportunity to do a solo performance.[78] Rolling Stone reporter Mikal Gilmore called the performance "extraordinary".[39] Jackson's performance drew comparisons to Elvis Presley's and the Beatles' appearances on The Ed Sullivan Show.[79] Anna Kisselgoff of The New York Times praised the perfect timing and technique involved in the dance.[80] Gordy described being "mesmerized" by the performance.[81] British Vogue called Jackson "a fashion pioneer [...] who gave new meaning to moonwalking, immortalised solitary, [and] sparkly gloves".[82]

At the 26th Annual Grammy Awards, Thriller won eight awards, and Jackson won an award for the E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial storybook. Winning eight Grammys in one ceremony is a record he holds with the band Santana.[60] Jackson and Quincy Jones won the award for Producer of the Year (Non-Classical). Thriller won Album of the Year (with Jackson as the album's artist and Jones as its co-producer), and the single won Best Pop Vocal Performance (Male) award for Jackson. "Beat It" won Record of the Year and Best Rock Vocal Performance (Male). "Billie Jean" won two Grammy awards: Best R&B Song and Best R&B Vocal Performance (Male), with Jackson as songwriter and singer, respectively.[60]

Thriller won the Grammy for Best Engineered Recording (Non Classical), acknowledging Bruce Swedien for his work on the album.[83] At the 11th Annual American Music Awards, Jackson won another eight awards and became the youngest artist to win the Award of Merit.[84] He also won Favorite Male Artist, Favorite Soul/R&B Artist, and Favorite Pop/Rock Artist. "Beat It" won Favorite Soul/R&B Video, Favorite Pop/Rock Video and Favorite Pop/Rock Single. The album won Favorite Soul/R&B Album and Favorite Pop/Rock Album.[84][85] Thriller's sales doubled after the release of an extended music video, Michael Jackson's Thriller, which sees Jackson dancing with a horde of zombies.[86][87]

The success transformed Jackson into a dominant force in global pop culture,[87] and the album "conquered racial divides".[88] Jackson had the highest royalty rate in the music industry at that point, with about $2 for every album sold (equivalent to $6 in 2024), and was making record-breaking profits. Dolls modeled after Jackson appeared in stores in May 1984 for $12 each.[89] In the same year, The Making of Michael Jackson's Thriller, a documentary about the music video, won a Grammy for Best Music Video (Longform).[60] Time described Jackson's influence at that point as "star of records, radio, rock video. A one-man rescue team for the music business. A songwriter who sets the beat for a decade. A dancer with the fanciest feet on the street. A singer who cuts across all boundaries of taste and style and color too."[89] The New York Times wrote "in the world of pop music, there is Michael Jackson and there is everybody else".[90]


The Jacksons performing during their Victory Tour at the Arrowhead Stadium in 1984
In November 1983, Jackson and his brothers partnered with PepsiCo in a $5 million promotional deal that broke records for a celebrity endorsement (equivalent to $15.8 million in 2024). The first Pepsi campaign, which ran in the US from 1983 to 1984 and launched its "New Generation" theme, included tour sponsorship, public relations events, and in-store displays. Jackson helped to create the advertisement, and suggested using his song "Billie Jean", with revised lyrics, as its jingle.[91]

On January 27, 1984, Michael and other members of the Jacksons filmed a Pepsi commercial overseen by Phil Dusenberry,[92] a BBDO ad agency executive, and Alan Pottasch, Pepsi's Worldwide Creative Director, at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles. During a simulated concert before a full house of fans, pyrotechnics accidentally set Jackson's hair on fire, causing second-degree burns to his scalp. Jackson underwent treatment to hide the scars and had his third rhinoplasty shortly thereafter.[93] Pepsi settled out of court, and Jackson donated the $1.5 million (equivalent to $4.5 million in 2024) settlement to the Brotman Medical Center in Culver City, California; its now-closed Michael Jackson Burn Center was named in his honor.[94][95] Jackson signed a second agreement with Pepsi in the late 1980s for $10 million (equivalent to $27.7 million in 2024). The second campaign covered 20 countries and provided financial support for Jackson's Bad album and 1987–1988 world tour. Jackson had endorsements and advertising deals with other companies, such as LA Gear, Suzuki, and Sony, but none were as significant as his deals with Pepsi.[91]

The Victory Tour of 1984 headlined the Jacksons and showcased Jackson's new solo material to more than two million Americans. It was the last tour he did with his brothers.[96] Following controversy over the concert's ticket sales, Jackson donated his share of the proceeds, an estimated $3 to 5 million, to charity.[97] During the last concert of the Victory Tour at the Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, Jackson announced his split from the Jacksons during "Shake Your Body".[98]

"We Are the World" and other commercial activities (1985)

Jackson with USA for Africa in 1985
With Lionel Richie, Jackson co-wrote the charity single "We Are the World" (1985), which raised money for the poor in the US and Africa.[99][100] It earned $63 million (equivalent to $184 million in 2024),[100] and became one of the best-selling singles of all time, with 20 million copies sold.[101] It won four Grammy Awards in 1985, including Song of the Year for Jackson and Richie.[99] Jackson, Jones, and the promoter Ken Kragen received special awards for their roles in the song's creation.[99][102][103][104]


Jackson signing a "We Are the World" poster in 1985
Jackson collaborated with Paul McCartney in the early 1980s, and learned that McCartney was making $40 million a year from owning the rights to other artists' songs.[100] By 1983, Jackson had begun buying publishing rights to others' songs, but he was careful with his acquisitions, only bidding on a few of the dozens that were offered to him. Jackson's early acquisitions of music catalogs and song copyrights such as the Sly Stone collection included "Everyday People" (1968), Len Barry's "1-2-3" (1965), and Dion DiMucci's "The Wanderer" (1961) and "Runaround Sue" (1961). In 1984, Robert Holmes à Court announced he was selling the ATV Music Publishing catalog comprising the publishing rights to nearly 4,000 songs, including most of the Beatles' material.[105] In 1981, McCartney had been offered the catalog for £20 million ($40 million) (equivalent to $138 million in 2024).[100][106] Jackson submitted a bid of $46 million (equivalent to $139 million in 2024) on November 20, 1984.[105] When Jackson and McCartney were unable to make a joint purchase, McCartney did not want to be the sole owner of the Beatles' songs, and did not pursue an offer on his own.[107][106] Jackson's agents were unable to come to a deal, and in May 1985 left talks after having spent more than $1 million and four months of due diligence work on the negotiations.[105]

In June 1985, Jackson and Branca learned that Charles Koppelman's and Marty Bandier's The Entertainment Company had made a tentative offer to buy ATV Music for $50 million; in early August, Holmes à Court contacted Jackson and talks resumed. Jackson's increased bid of $47.5 million (equivalent to $139 million in 2024) was accepted because he could close the deal more quickly, having already completed due diligence.[105] Jackson agreed to visit Holmes à Court in Australia, where he would appear on the Channel Seven Perth Telethon.[108] His purchase of ATV Music was finalized on August 10, 1985.[100][105]

Increased tabloid speculation (1986–1987)
See also: Health and appearance of Michael Jackson
Jackson's skin had been medium-brown during his youth, but from the mid-1980s gradually grew paler. The change drew widespread media coverage, including speculation that he had been bleaching his skin.[109][110][111] His dermatologist, Arnold Klein, said he observed in 1983 that Jackson had vitiligo,[112] a condition characterized by patches of the skin losing their pigment. He also identified discoid lupus erythematosus in Jackson. He diagnosed Jackson with lupus that year,[112] and with vitiligo in 1986.[113] Vitiligo's drastic effects on the body can cause psychological distress. Jackson used fair-colored makeup,[114] and possibly skin-bleaching prescription creams,[115] to cover up the uneven blotches of color caused by the illness. The creams would depigment the blotches, and, with the application of makeup, he could appear very pale.[116] Jackson said he had not purposely bleached his skin and could not control his vitiligo, adding, "When people make up stories that I don't want to be who I am, it hurts me."[117] He became friends with Klein and Klein's assistant, Debbie Rowe. Rowe later became Jackson's second wife and the mother of his first two children.[118]

In his 1988 autobiography and a 1993 interview, Jackson said he had had two rhinoplasty surgeries and a cleft chin surgery but no more than that. He said he lost weight in the early 1980s because of a change in diet to achieve a dancer's body.[119] Witnesses reported that he was often dizzy, and speculated he was suffering from anorexia nervosa. Periods of weight loss became a recurring problem later in his life.[120] After his death, Jackson's mother said that he first turned to cosmetic procedures to remedy his vitiligo, because he did not want to look like a "spotted cow". She said he had received more than the two cosmetic surgeries he claimed and speculated that he had become addicted to them.[121]

In 1986, it was reported that Jackson slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber to slow aging. He denied the story,[122] although it was alleged that Jackson leaked an image of him sleeping in a glass chamber (according to Jackson, this was a promotional shot from an upcoming space opera featuring himself) to The National Enquirer.[123] It was also reported that Jackson took female hormone shots to keep his voice high and facial hair wispy, proposed to Elizabeth Taylor and possibly had a shrine of her, and had cosmetic surgery on his eyes. Jackson's manager Frank DiLeo denied all of them, except for Jackson having a chamber. DiLeo added "I don't know if he sleeps in it. I'm not for it. But Michael thinks it's something that's probably healthy for him. He's a bit of a health fanatic."[124]

When Jackson took his pet chimpanzee Bubbles to tour in Japan, the media portrayed Jackson as an aspiring Disney cartoon character who befriended animals.[125] It was also reported that Jackson had offered to buy the bones of Joseph Merrick (the "Elephant Man").[126] In June 1987, the Chicago Tribune reported Jackson's publicist bidding $1 million for the skeleton to the London Hospital Medical College on his behalf. The college maintained the skeleton was not for sale. DiLeo said Jackson had an "absorbing interest" in Merrick, "purely based on his awareness of the ethical, medical and historical significance".[127]

In September 1986, using the oxygen chamber story, the British tabloid The Sun branded Jackson "Wacko Jacko", a name Jackson came to despise.[5][128] The Atlantic noted that the name "Jacko" has racist connotations, as it originates from Jacko Macacco, a monkey used in monkey-baiting matches at the Westminster Pit in the early 1820s, and "Jacko" was used in Cockney slang to refer to monkeys in general.[129]

Jackson worked with George Lucas and Francis Ford Coppola on the 17-minute $30 million 3D film Captain EO, which ran from 1986 at Disneyland and Epcot, and later at Tokyo Disneyland and Euro Disneyland.[130] After having been removed in the late 1990s, it returned to the theme park for several years after Jackson's death.[131] In 1987, Ebony reported that Jackson had disassociated himself from the Jehovah's Witnesses.[132] Katherine Jackson said this might have been because some Witnesses strongly opposed the Thriller video,[133] which Michael denounced in a Witness publication in 1984.[134] In 2001, Jackson told an interviewer he was still a Jehovah's Witness.[135]

Bad, autobiography, and Neverland (1987–1990)

Jackson performing in Vienna, Austria, 1988
Jackson's first album in five years, Bad (1987), was highly anticipated, with the industry expecting another major success.[136] It became the first album to produce five US number-one singles: "I Just Can't Stop Loving You", "Bad", "The Way You Make Me Feel", "Man in the Mirror", and "Dirty Diana". Another song, "Smooth Criminal", peaked at number seven.[56] Bad won the 1988 Grammy for Best Engineered Recording – Non Classical and the 1990 Grammy Award for Best Music Video, Short Form for "Leave Me Alone".[60][83] Jackson won an Award of Achievement at the American Music Awards in 1989 after Bad generated five number-one singles, became the first album to top the charts in 25 countries and the best-selling album worldwide in 1987 and 1988.[137][138] The Bad tour ran from September 12, 1987, to January 27, 1989.[139] In Japan, the tour had 14 sellouts and drew 570,000 people, nearly tripling the previous record for a single tour.[140] The 504,000 people who attended seven sold-out shows at Wembley Stadium set a new Guinness World Record.[141] Bad cemented Jackson's status as a dominant music force;[142] the album has sold over 35 million copies worldwide, which ranks it amongst the best-selling albums ever.[143][144][145][146][147]

In 1988, Jackson released his autobiography, Moonwalk, with input from Stephen Davis and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.[148] It sold 200,000 copies,[149] and reached the top of The New York Times bestsellers list.[150] Jackson discussed his childhood, the Jackson 5, and the abuse from his father.[151] He attributed his changing facial appearance to three plastic surgeries, puberty, weight loss, a strict vegetarian diet, a change in hairstyle, and stage lighting.[152][119] In June, Jackson was honored with the Grand Vermeil Medal of the City of Paris by the then Mayor of Paris Jacques Chirac during his stay in the city as part of the Bad tour.[153][154] On July 20, he became the first commoner in history to enter London's Guildhall through the building's Royal Entrance.[155] In October, Jackson released a film, Moonwalker, which featured live footage and short films starring Jackson and Joe Pesci. In the US it was released direct-to-video and became the bestselling video cassette in the country.[156][157] The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified it as eight times Platinum in the US.[158]

In March 1988, Jackson purchased 2,700 acres (11 km2) of land near Santa Ynez, California, to build a new home, Neverland Ranch, at a cost of $17 million (equivalent to $45 million in 2024).[159] He installed a Ferris wheel, a carousel, a movie theater and a zoo.[159][160][161] A security staff of 40 patrolled the grounds.[160] Shortly afterwards, he appeared in the first Western television advertisement in the Soviet Union.[162]

Jackson became known as the "King of Pop", a nickname that Jackson's publicists embraced.[19][163][164] When Elizabeth Taylor presented him with the Soul Train Heritage Award in 1989, she called him "the true king of pop, rock and soul."[165] President George H. W. Bush designated him the White House's "Artist of the Decade".[166] At the 38th BMI Awards in 1990, Jackson was the first person to be honored with an award named after its recipient.[167] From 1985 to 1990, Jackson donated $455,000 to the United Negro College Fund,[168] and all profits from his single "Man in the Mirror" went to charity.[169] His rendition of "You Were There" at Sammy Davis Jr.'s 60th birthday celebration won Jackson a second Emmy nomination.[75] Jackson was the bestselling artist of the 1980s.[170]

Dangerous and public social work (1991–1993)




Jackson during the Dangerous World Tour in Monza, Italy in 1992
In March 1991, Jackson renewed his contract with Sony for $65 million (equivalent to $150 million in 2024), a record-breaking deal,[171] beating Neil Diamond's renewal contract with Columbia Records.[172] In 1991, he released his eighth album, Dangerous, co-produced with Teddy Riley.[173] It was certified eight times platinum in the US, and by 2018 had sold 32 million copies worldwide.[174][175] In the US, the first single, "Black or White", was the album's highest-charting song; it was number one on the Billboard Hot 100 for seven weeks and achieved similar chart performances worldwide.[176] The second single, "Remember the Time" peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart.[177] At the end of 1992, Dangerous was the bestselling album of the year worldwide and "Black or White" the bestselling single of the year worldwide at the Billboard Music Awards.[170] In 1993, he performed "Remember the Time" at the Soul Train Music Awards in a chair, saying he twisted his ankle during dance rehearsals.[178] In the UK, "Heal the World" made No. 2 on the charts in 1992.[179]

Jackson founded the Heal the World Foundation in 1992. The charity brought underprivileged children to Jackson's ranch to use the theme park rides, and sent millions of dollars around the globe to help children threatened by war, poverty, and disease. That July, Jackson published his second book, Dancing the Dream, a collection of poetry. The Dangerous World Tour ran between June 1992 and November 1993 and grossed $100 million (equivalent to $220 million in 2024); Jackson performed for over 3.5 million people in 70 concerts, all of which were outside the US.[180][181] Part of the proceeds went to Heal the World Foundation.[182] Jackson sold the broadcast rights of the tour to HBO for $20 million (equivalent to $45 million in 2024), a record-breaking deal that still stands.[183]

Following the death of HIV/AIDS spokesperson and friend Ryan White, Jackson pleaded with the Clinton administration at Bill Clinton's inaugural gala to give more money to HIV/AIDS charities and research[184][185] and performed "Gone Too Soon", a song dedicated to White, and "Heal the World" at the gala.[186] Jackson visited Africa in early 1992; on his first stop in Gabon he was greeted by more than 100,000 people, some of them carrying signs that read "Welcome Home Michael",[187] and was awarded an Officer of the National Order of Merit from President Omar Bongo.[188][189] During his trip to Ivory Coast, Jackson drew larger crowds than Pope John Paul II on his previous visits.[190] He was crowned "King Sani" by a tribal chief in the Ivorian village of Krindjabo, where he thanked the dignitaries in French and English, signed documents formalizing his kingship, and sat on a golden throne while presiding over ceremonial dances.[187]

In January 1993, Jackson performed at the Super Bowl XXVII halftime show in Pasadena, California. The NFL sought a big-name artist to keep ratings high during halftime following dwindling audience figures.[191][192] With 133.4 million viewers, it was the first Super Bowl whose halftime show drew greater audience figures than the game.[193] Jackson played "Jam", "Billie Jean", "Black or White", and "Heal the World". Dangerous rose 90 places in the US albums chart after the performance.[109]

Jackson gave a 90-minute interview with Oprah Winfrey on February 10, 1993. He spoke of his childhood abuse at the hands of his father; he believed he had missed out on much of his childhood, and said that he often cried from loneliness. He denied tabloid rumors that he had bought the bones of the Elephant Man, slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber, or bleached his skin, and stated for the first time that he had vitiligo. After the interview, Dangerous re-entered the US albums chart in the top 10, more than a year after its release.[19][109] The interview itself became the most-watched television interview in United States history to date, with more than 90 million viewers.[194]

In January 1993, Jackson won three American Music Awards: Favorite Pop/Rock Album (Dangerous), Favorite Soul/R&B Single ("Remember the Time"), and was the first to win the International Artist Award of Excellence.[195][196] In February, he won the "Living Legend Award" at the 35th Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles.[60] He attended the award ceremony with Brooke Shields.[197] Dangerous was nominated for Best Vocal Performance (for "Black or White"), Best R&B Vocal Performance ("Jam") and Best R&B Song ("Jam"), and Bruce Swedien and Teddy Riley won the Grammy for Best Engineered – Non Classical.[83]

First child sexual abuse accusations and first marriage (1993–1995)
Main article: 1993 Michael Jackson sexual abuse allegations
In early 1993, Michael Jackson befriended 13-year-old Jordan Chandler through Jordan's stepfather who became acquainted after Jackson had rented a vehicle.[198] On July 8, 1993, Evan Chandler, Jordan's father and a Los Angeles dentist, was recorded threatening to "destroy" Jackson's career with a "carefully planned plot, with people in place ready to set it in motion" if Jackson did not meet his demands, revealing clear financial motives: "If I go through with this, I win big-time. There’s no way I lose".[199][200] On July 9, Jackson's investigator, Anthony Pellicano, met Jordan, who denied any abuse or inappropriate touching by Jackson.[201] Evan Chandler's lawyer would later call Beverly Hills psychiatrist Dr. Mathis Abrams and present him with a hypothetical situation. In reply and without having met either Jordan Chandler or his parents, Abrams sent Rothman a two-page letter in which he states that "reasonable suspicion would exist that sexual abuse may have occurred" [202] after receiving the letter from Dr Abrams Evan Chandler allegedly received a confession from his son Jordan.[202] Evan demands $20 million from Jackson on August 4, 1993, without going to law enforcement regarding the reports of the abuse that was claimed to have taken place, but Jackson refused and sued Chandler for extortion.[199] Later a meeting at the Westwood Marquis Hotel, Evan and his son Jordan met Michael Jackson and Anthony Pellicano without their lawyer Barry Rothman, Evan greeted Jackson with a hug before pulling out a letter from Dr. Mathis Abrams and reading its allegations of child molestation aloud, As Evan cited the molestation references, Jordan lowered his head and then looked at Jackson with evident surprise, casting doubt on the claims as he had reportedly already reported his confession weeks prior. The encounter concluded with Evan pointing at Jackson and declaring, "I'm going to ruin you," revealing a clear intent to threaten rather than seek justice—a stark contrast to the embrace that opened the meeting.[202] From August 9–13, 1993 Evan Chandler and his legal team made various counteroffers to secure a settlement from Jackson, escalating their financial demands after his refusal to pay the initial $20 million, with Evan later filing a civil suit in September demanding $30 million for alleged damages [203] which were all denied by Jackson, prompting Chandler to go public with the claims of child molestation.[204][205][206] Jackson's older sister La Toya accused him of being a pedophile;[207] she later retracted this, saying she had been forced into it by her abusive husband.[208]

Prosecutors raided Neverland Ranch and other places of residency while Jackson was on tour in August, but no leads were found as the investigators ruled that there was no medical evidence or physical evidence. Additionally hundreds of children were investigated but all of them stated no abuse or improper behavior had taken place.[209] Attention was later brought to two legal art books depicting featuring young boys playing, running, and swimming in various states of undress, however Jackson denied knowing of the books' content and claimed if they were there, someone had to have sent them to him and he did not open them. No child pornography or other incriminating evidence was found.[210][211] In December 1993, Prosecutor Tom Sneddon filed a strip search on Jackson based on the drawing obtained by Jordan Chandler which had been sent to the authorities, however the drawing did not match and prosecutors sought out Jackson's doctors and family inquiring about the possibility the singer had altered his genitals as to explain the mismatch.[212][213][214] In November 1993, Jackson requested that the civil trial be postponed until after the criminal hearing was completed due to a violation of his civil rights, under the circumstances of having to defend himself under double jeopardy. This motion was denied and in January 1994 the civil lawsuit was settled for $15,331,250 with separate payments of 1.5 million for Evan and June Chandler coming out to a total of 18.3 million allocated to the Chandler family, lower than the initial demand of 20-30 million requested by Evan Chandler.[215][216] The document shows that the Chandlers dropped the child molestation allegations from their complaint with Jackson's settlement being filed over claims of negligence. It was later revealed that this settlement did not prevent the Chandlers from testifying in the criminal case [217] The police never pressed criminal charges.[218] The prosecution continued to investigate Jackson from January to June 1994 with Jordan Chandler continuing to co-operate with investigators,[219] by July 1994 multiple grand juries had been called however jurors remarked that no damaging evidence was heard against Jackson. "The [Santa Barbara] grand jury in Michael Jackson's case was dismissed and one juror said he heard no evidence against [Jackson]... Another juror told CNN that he heard no evidence against him [Jackson] during the hearing."[220] On September 21, 1994, after 400 witnesses had been investigated with another 30 called in front of the grand juries, the investigation was closed. A few potential leads had been found but all of them turned out to be false.[221]

Jackson had been taking painkillers for his reconstructive scalp surgeries, administered due to the Pepsi commercial accident in 1984, and became dependent on them to cope with the stress of the sexual abuse allegations.[222] On November 12, 1993, Jackson canceled the remainder of the Dangerous World Tour due to health problems, stress from the allegations and painkiller addiction. He thanked his close friend Elizabeth Taylor for support, encouragement and counsel. The end of the tour concluded his sponsorship deal with Pepsi.[223]

In late 1993, Jackson proposed to Lisa Marie Presley, the daughter of Elvis Presley, over the phone.[224] They were married in La Vega, Dominican Republic, in May 1994 by civil judge Hugo Francisco Álvarez Pérez.[225] The tabloid media speculated that the wedding was a publicity stunt to deflect away from Jackson's sexual abuse allegations and jump-start Presley's career as a singer.[225][226] Their marriage ended little more than a year later, and they separated in December 1995.[227] Presley cited "irreconcilable differences" when filing for divorce the next month and only sought to reclaim her maiden name as her settlement.[226][228] After the divorce, Judge Pérez said, "They lasted longer than I thought they would. I gave them a year. They lasted a year and a half."[225] Presley later said she and Jackson had attempted to reconcile intermittently for four years following their divorce, and that she had traveled the world to be with him.[229]

Jackson composed music for the Sega Genesis video game Sonic the Hedgehog 3 (1994), but left the project around the time the sexual abuse allegations surfaced and went uncredited. Jackson's involvement was the subject of fan speculation for decades until Sonic co-creator Yuji Naka confirmed it in 2022.[230][231] Sega Technical Institute director Roger Hector and Sonic co-creator Naoto Ohshima said that Jackson was terminated and his music reworked following the allegations.[232][233] However, Jackson's musical director Brad Buxer and other members of Jackson's team said he went uncredited because he was unhappy with how the Genesis replicated his music.[234] The game's credits theme served as the basis for Jackson's 1996 song "Stranger in Moscow".[235]

HIStory, second marriage, fatherhood and Blood on the Dance Floor: HIStory in the Mix (1995–1997)
Close-up of a pale skinned Jackson with black hair. He is wearing a black jacket with white designs on it.
Jackson at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival for the premiere of Michael Jackson's Ghosts
In June 1995, Jackson released the double album HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I. The first disc, HIStory Begins, is a greatest hits album (reissued in 2001 as Greatest Hits: HIStory, Volume I). The second disc, HIStory Continues, contains 13 original songs and two cover versions. The album debuted at number one on the charts and has been certified for eight million shipments in the US.[236] It is the bestselling multi-disc album of all time, with 20 million copies (40 million units) sold worldwide.[176][237] HIStory received a Grammy nomination for Album of the Year.[60] The New York Times reviewed it as "the testimony of a musician whose self-pity now equals his talent".[238]

The first single from HIStory was "Scream/Childhood". "Scream", a duet with Jackson's youngest sister Janet, protests the media's treatment of Jackson during the 1993 child abuse allegations against him. The single reached number five on the Billboard Hot 100,[177] and received a Grammy nomination for "Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals".[60] The second single, "You Are Not Alone", holds the Guinness world record for the first song to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.[239] It received a Grammy nomination for "Best Pop Vocal Performance" in 1995.[60]

In 1995 the Anti-Defamation League and other groups complained that "Jew me, sue me, everybody do me/ Kick me, kike me, don't you black or white me", the original lyrics of "They Don't Care About Us", were antisemitic. Jackson released a revised version of the song.[240] In late 1995, Jackson was admitted to a hospital after collapsing during rehearsals for a televised performance, caused by a stress-related panic attack.[241] In November, Jackson merged his ATV Music catalog with Sony's music publishing division, creating Sony/ATV Music Publishing. He retained ownership of half the company, earning $95 million up front (equivalent to $196 million in 2024) as well as the rights to more songs.[242][243]

"Earth Song" was the third single released from HIStory, and topped the UK Singles Chart for six weeks over Christmas 1995.[179] It became the 87th-bestselling single in the UK.[244] At the 1996 Brit Awards, Jackson's performance of "Earth Song" was disrupted by Pulp singer Jarvis Cocker, who was protesting what Cocker saw as Jackson's "Christ-like" persona. Jackson said the stage invasion was "disgusting and cowardly".[245][246]

In 1996, Jackson won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form, for "Scream" and an American Music Award for Favorite Pop/Rock Male Artist.[60][247] In July 1996, Jackson performed for Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah's fiftieth birthday at Jerudong Park Amphitheater, which was specifically built for that birthday concert.[248] Jackson was reportedly paid $17 million (equivalent to $34 million in 2024).[249] Jackson promoted HIStory with the HIStory World Tour, from September 7, 1996, to October 15, 1997. He performed 82 concerts in five continents, 35 countries and 58 cities to over 4.5 million fans, his most attended tour. It grossed $165 million (equivalent to $323 million in 2024).[139] During the tour, in Sydney, Australia, Jackson married Debbie Rowe, a dermatology assistant, who was six months pregnant with his first child.[250]

Michael Joseph Jackson Jr. (commonly known as Prince) was born on February 13, 1997. His sister Paris-Michael Katherine Jackson was born on April 3, 1998.[251] Jackson and Rowe divorced in 2000, Rowe conceded custody of the children, with an $8 million settlement (equivalent to $15.1 million in 2024).[252] In 2004, after the second child abuse allegations against Jackson, she returned to court to reclaim custody. The suit was settled in 2006.[253]

In 1997, Jackson released Blood on the Dance Floor: HIStory in the Mix, which contained remixes of singles from HIStory and five new songs. Worldwide sales stand at 6 million copies, making it the bestselling remix album. It reached number one in the UK, as did the single "Blood on the Dance Floor".[254] In the US, the album reached number 24 and was certified platinum.[174]

Label dispute and Invincible (1997–2002)
From October 1997 to September 2001, Jackson worked on his tenth solo album, Invincible, which cost $30 million (equivalent to $53.3 million in 2024) to record, making it the most expensive album of all time.[255] In June 1999, Jackson joined Luciano Pavarotti for a War Child benefit concert in Modena, Italy. The show raised a million dollars for refugees of the Kosovo War, and additional funds for the children of Guatemala.[256] Later that month, Jackson organized a series of "Michael Jackson & Friends" benefit concerts in Germany and Korea. Other artists involved included Slash, The Scorpions, Boyz II Men, Luther Vandross, Mariah Carey, A. R. Rahman, Prabhu Deva Sundaram, Shobana, Andrea Bocelli and Luciano Pavarotti. The proceeds went to the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund, the Red Cross and UNESCO.[257] In 1999, Jackson was presented with the "Outstanding Humanitarian Award" at Bollywood Movie Awards in New York City where he noted Mahatma Gandhi to have been an inspiration for him.[258][259] From August 1999 to 2000, he lived in New York City at 4 East 74th Street.[260] At the turn of the century, Jackson was awarded with the Artist of the 1980s Decade Award at the 27th American Music Awards,[261] and the Best-Selling Pop Male Artist of the Millennium Award at the 12nd World Music Awards.[262] In 2000, Guinness World Records recognized him for supporting 39 charities, more than any other entertainer.[263] In September 2001, two concerts were held at Madison Square Garden to mark Jackson's 30th year as a solo artist. Jackson performed with his brothers for the first time since 1984. The show also featured Mýa, Usher, Whitney Houston, Destiny's Child, Monica, Liza Minnelli and Slash. The first show was marred by technical lapses, and the crowd booed a speech by Marlon Brando.[264] 45 million people watched the television broadcast of the shows in November according to Nielsen Media Research.[265] After the September 11 attacks (in which Jackson narrowly avoided death by oversleeping and missing a scheduled meeting at the World Trade Center[266]), Jackson helped organize the United We Stand: What More Can I Give benefit concert at Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium in Washington, D.C., on October 21, 2001. Jackson performed "What More Can I Give" as the finale.[267]

The release of Invincible was preceded by a dispute between Jackson and his record label, Sony Music Entertainment. Jackson had expected the licenses to the masters of his albums to revert to him in the early 2000s, after which he would be able to promote the material however he pleased and keep the profits, but clauses in the contract set the revert date years into the future. Jackson sought an early exit from his contract.[268] Invincible was released on October 30, 2001. It was Jackson's first full-length album in six years, and the last album of original material he released in his lifetime.[268] It debuted at number one in 13 countries, and went on to sell eight million copies worldwide, receiving double-platinum certification in the US.[174][269][270]

On January 9, 2002, Jackson won his 22nd American Music Award for Artist of the Century.[271][272] Later that year, an anonymous surrogate mother gave birth to his third child, Prince Michael Jackson II (nicknamed "Blanket"[nb 2]), who had been conceived by artificial insemination.[273] On November 20, Jackson briefly held Blanket over the railing of his Berlin hotel room, four stories above ground level, prompting widespread criticism in the media. Jackson apologized for the incident, calling it "a terrible mistake".[274] On January 22, promoter Marcel Avram filed a breach of contract complaint against Jackson for failing to perform two planned 1999 concerts.[275] In March, a Santa Maria jury ordered Jackson to pay Avram $5.3 million (equivalent to $9.3 million in 2024).[276][277] On December 18, 2003, Jackson's attorneys dropped all appeals on the verdict and settled the lawsuit for an undisclosed amount.[278]

On April 24, 2002, Jackson performed at Apollo Theater. The concert was a fundraiser for the Democratic National Committee and former President Bill Clinton.[279] The money collected would be used to encourage citizens to vote. It raised $2.5 million (equivalent to $3.8 million in 2024).[280] The concert was called Michael Jackson: Live at the Apollo and was one of Jackson's final on-stage performances.[281]

In July 2002, at Al Sharpton's National Action Network in Harlem, Jackson called the Sony Music chairman Tommy Mottola "a racist, and very, very, very devilish", and accused him of exploiting black artists for his own gain. The accusation prompted Sharpton to form a coalition investigating whether Mottola exploited black artists.[282] Jackson charged that Mottola had called his colleague Irv Gotti a "fat nigger".[283] Sony issued a statement calling the accusations "ludicrous, spiteful, and hurtful" and said Mottola had championed Jackson's career for years.[282] Sony refused to renew Jackson's contract and said that a $25 million (equivalent to $43.7 million in 2024) promotional campaign had failed because Jackson refused to tour in the US for Invincible.[255]

Documentary, Number Ones, second child abuse allegations and acquittal (2002–2005)
Further information: Trial of Michael Jackson

Jackson in Las Vegas, 2003
Beginning in May 2002, a documentary film crew led by Martin Bashir followed Jackson for several months.[274] The documentary, broadcast in February 2003 as Living with Michael Jackson, showed Jackson holding hands and discussing sleeping arrangements with a twelve-year-old boy.[18][284] He said that he saw nothing wrong with having sleepovers with minors and sharing his bed and bedroom with various people, which aroused controversy. He insisted that the sleepovers were not sexual and that his words had been misunderstood.[285][286]

In October 2003, Jackson received the Key to the City of Las Vegas from Mayor Oscar Goodman.[287] On November 18, 2003, Sony released Number Ones, a greatest hits album. It was certified five times platinum by the RIAA, and ten times platinum in the UK, for shipments of at least 3 million units.[174][288]


Michael Jackson's mug shot in 2003
On December 18, 2003, Santa Barbara authorities charged Jackson with seven counts of child molestation and two counts of intoxicating a minor with alcoholic drinks.[289] Jackson denied the allegations and pleaded not guilty.[290] The People v. Jackson trial began on January 31, 2005, in Santa Maria, California, and lasted until the end of May. Jackson found the experience stressful and it affected his health. If convicted, he would have faced up to twenty years in prison.[291] On June 13, 2005, Jackson was acquitted on all counts.[292] FBI files on Jackson, released in 2009, revealed the FBI's role in the 2005 trial and the 1993 allegations, and showed that the FBI found no evidence of criminal conduct on Jackson's behalf.[293][294]

Final years, financial problems, Thriller 25 and This Is It (2005–2009)
Jackson is wearing an overcoat and walking from left to right. His face is obscured by his hair. His son is wearing a mask and a baseball cap. Two men are with them; a third person is holding an umbrella over the Jacksons.
Jackson and his son Blanket in Disneyland Paris, 2006
After the trial, Jackson became reclusive.[295] In June 2005, he moved to Bahrain as a guest of Sheikh Abdullah.[296] In early 2006, it was announced that Jackson had signed a contract with a Bahrain startup, Two Seas Records. Nothing came of the deal, and the Two Seas CEO, Guy Holmes, later said it was never finalized.[297][298] Holmes also found that Jackson was on the verge of bankruptcy and was involved in 47 ongoing lawsuits.[296] By September 2006, Jackson was no longer affiliated with Two Seas.[298]

In April 2006, Jackson agreed to use a piece of his ATV catalog stake, then worth about $1 billion, as collateral against his $270 million worth of loans from Bank of America. Bank of America had sold the loans to Fortress Investments, an investment company that buys distressed loans, the year before. As part of the agreement, Fortress Investments provided Jackson a new loan of $300 million with reduced interest payments (equivalent to $470 million in 2024). Sony Music would have the option to buy half of his stake, or about 25% of the catalog, at a set price. Jackson's financial managers had urged him to shed part of his stake to avoid bankruptcy.[243][299] The main house at Neverland Ranch was closed as a cost-cutting measure, while Jackson lived in Bahrain at the hospitality of Abdullah.[300] At least thirty of Jackson's employees had not been paid on time and were owed $306,000 in back wages. Jackson was ordered to pay $100,000 in penalties.[243] Jackson never returned to Neverland after his acquittal.[301]

In mid-2006, Jackson moved to Grouse Lodge, a residential recording studio near Rosemount, County Westmeath, Ireland. There, he began work on a new album with the American producers will.i.am and Rodney Jenkins.[302] That November, Jackson invited an Access Hollywood camera crew into the studio in Westmeath.[176] On November 15, Jackson briefly joined in on a performance of "We Are the World" at the World Music Awards in London, his last public performance, and accepted the Diamond Award for sales of 100 million records.[176][303] He returned to the US in December, settling in Las Vegas. That month, he attended James Brown's funeral in Augusta, Georgia, where he gave a eulogy calling Brown his greatest inspiration.[304]

A view from above of a large property in a semi-desert. The landscape is pale with clumps of vegetation. The property shows circular structures between the buildings.
An aerial view of part of Jackson's 2,800-acre (11 km2) Neverland Valley Ranch near Los Olivos, California, showing the rides
In 2007, Jackson and Sony bought another music publishing company, Famous Music LLC, formerly owned by Viacom. The deal gave Jackson the rights to songs by Eminem and Beck, among others.[305][306] In a brief interview, Jackson said he had no regrets about his career despite his problems and "deliberate attempts to hurt [him]".[307] That March, Jackson visited a US Army post in Japan, Camp Zama, to greet more than 3,000 troops and their families.[308][309] As of September, Jackson was still working on his next album, which he never completed.[310]

In 2008, for the 25th anniversary of Thriller, Jackson and Sony released Thriller 25, with two remixes released as singles: "The Girl Is Mine 2008" and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin' 2008".[311] Thriller 25 was the last recorded work released during his life which he was extensively involved with, with Jackson co-producing the album's remix tracks. For his 50th birthday, Sony BMG released a series of greatest hits albums, King of Pop, with different tracklists for different regions.[312] That July, Fortress Investments threatened to foreclose on Neverland Ranch, which he had used as collateral for his loans. Fortress sold Jackson's debts to Colony Capital LLC.[313] In November, Jackson transferred Neverland Ranch's title to Sycamore Valley Ranch Company LLC, a joint venture between Jackson and Colony Capital LLC. The deal earned him $35 million.[314] In 2009, Jackson arranged to sell a collection of his memorabilia of more than 1,000 items through Julien's Auction House, but canceled the auction in April.[315]

In March 2009, amid speculation about his finances and health, Jackson announced a series of comeback concerts, This Is It, at a press conference at the O2 Arena.[316] The shows were to be his first major concerts since the HIStory World Tour in 1997. Jackson suggested he would retire after the shows. The initial plan was for ten concerts in London, followed by shows in Paris, New York City and Mumbai. Randy Phillips, the president and chief executive of AEG Live, predicted the first ten dates would earn Jackson £50 million.[317]

The London residency was increased to fifty dates after record-breaking ticket sales; more than one million were sold in less than two hours.[318] The concerts were to run from July 13, 2009, to March 6, 2010. Jackson moved to Los Angeles, where he rehearsed in the weeks leading up to the tour under the direction of the choreographer Kenny Ortega, whom he had worked with during his previous tours. Rehearsals took place at the Forum and the Staples Center owned by AEG.[319] By this point, Jackson's debt had grown to almost $500 million. By the time of his death, he was three or four months behind payments on his home in San Fernando Valley.[320][321] The Independent reported that Jackson planned a string of further ventures designed to recoup his debts, including a world tour, a new album, films, a museum and a casino.[316]

Death
Main article: Death of Michael Jackson
Jackson's Star with flowers and notes on it
Fans placed flowers and notes on Jackson's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on the day of his death.
On June 25, 2009, less than three weeks before his concert residency was due to begin in London, with all concerts sold out, Jackson died from cardiac arrest, caused by a propofol and benzodiazepine overdose.[322][323] Conrad Murray, his personal physician, had given Jackson various medications to help him sleep at his rented mansion in Holmby Hills, Los Angeles. Paramedics received a 911 call at 12:21 pm Pacific time (19:21 UTC) and arrived at the property four minutes later.[324] Jackson was not breathing and CPR was performed.[325] Resuscitation efforts continued en route to Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, and for more than an hour after Jackson's arrival there, but were unsuccessful,[326][327] and Jackson was pronounced dead at 2:26 pm Pacific time (21:26 UTC).[328][329] Murray had administered propofol, lorazepam, and midazolam;[330] Jackson's death was caused by a propofol overdose.[323][327]

News of his death spread quickly online, causing websites to slow down and crash from user overload,[331] and it put unprecedented strain[332] on many services and websites including Google,[333] AOL Instant Messenger,[332] Twitter and Wikipedia.[333] Overall, web traffic rose by between 11% and 20%.[334][335] MTV and BET aired marathons of Jackson's music videos,[336] and Jackson specials aired on television stations around the world.[337] MTV briefly returned to its original music video format,[6] and they aired hours of Jackson's music videos, with live news specials featuring reactions from MTV personalities and other celebrities.[338]

Memorial service
Main article: Michael Jackson memorial service
A large pink/cream-colored box in front of a stained glass window.
Jackson's unmarked crypt at the end of the Sanctuary of Ascension in the Holly Terrace of the Great Mausoleum, Forest Lawn Glendale
A group of people standing outside a gated area. There are trees, bushes, and grassed areas. A majority of the area the people and in are shadowed by the trees by the gate.
Fans visiting the makeshift memorial set up outside the Neverland Ranch entrance shortly after Jackson's death
Jackson's memorial was held on July 7, 2009, at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, preceded by a private family service at Forest Lawn Memorial Park's Hall of Liberty. Over 1.6 million fans applied for tickets to the memorial; the 8,750 recipients were drawn at random, and each received two tickets.[339] The memorial service was one of the most watched events in streaming history,[340] with an estimated US audience of 31.1 million[341] and a worldwide audience of an estimated 2.5 to 3 billion.[342][343]

Mariah Carey, Stevie Wonder, Lionel Richie, Jennifer Hudson, and Shaheen Jafargholi performed at the memorial, and Smokey Robinson and Queen Latifah gave eulogies.[344] Al Sharpton received a standing ovation with cheers when he told Jackson's children: "Wasn't nothing strange about your daddy. It was strange what your daddy had to deal with. But he dealt with it anyway."[345] Jackson's 11-year-old daughter Paris Katherine, speaking publicly for the first time, wept as she addressed the crowd.[346][347] Lucious Smith provided a closing prayer.[348] On September 3, 2009, the body of Jackson was entombed at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California.[349]

Criminal investigation and prosecution of Conrad Murray
Main article: People v. Murray
In August 2009, the Los Angeles County Coroner ruled that Jackson's death was a homicide.[350][351] Law enforcement officials charged Murray with involuntary manslaughter on February 8, 2010.[352] In late 2011, he was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter[353] and held without bail to await sentencing.[354] Murray was sentenced to four years in prison, but was released after one year and eleven months.[355]

Posthumous sales
At the 2009 American Music Awards, Jackson won four posthumous awards, including two for his compilation album Number Ones, bringing his total American Music Awards to 26.[356][357] In the year after his death, more than 16.1 million copies of Jackson's albums were sold in the US alone, and 35 million copies were sold worldwide, more than any other artist in 2009.[358][359] He became the first artist to sell one million music downloads in a week, with 2.6 million song downloads. Thriller, Number Ones and The Essential Michael Jackson became the first catalog albums to outsell any new album.[360] Jackson also became the first artist to have four of the top-20 bestselling albums in a single year in the US.[361] Within the year following his death, Jackson sold over 75 million records worldwide.[362] By the end of 2013, Jackson had sold over 50 million albums worldwide since his death.[363]

Following the surge in sales, in March 2010, Sony Music signed a $250 million deal (equivalent to $360 million in 2024) with the Jackson estate to extend their distribution rights to Jackson's back catalog until at least 2017; it had been due to expire in 2015. It was the most expensive music contract for a single artist in history.[364][365] They agreed to release ten albums of previously unreleased material and new collections of released work.[364][366] The deal was extended in 2017.[367] That July, a Los Angeles court awarded Quincy Jones $9.4 million of disputed royalty payments for Off the Wall, Thriller, and Bad.[52] In July 2018, Sony/ATV bought the estate's stake in EMI for $287.5 million.[368]

In 2014, Jackson became the first artist to have a top-ten single in the Billboard Hot 100 in five different decades.[369] The following year, Thriller became the first album to be certified for 30 million shipments by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).[370] A year later, it was certified 33× platinum after Soundscan added streams and audio downloads to album certifications.[371][nb 3]

In February 2024, Sony Music acquired half of Jackson's publishing rights and recording masters for an estimated $600 million. The deal includes assets from Jackson's Mijac publishing catalog, but excludes royalties from several Jackson-related productions, including the MJ Broadway musical and the Michael biopic. The deal is possibly the largest transaction ever for a single musician's work.[373][374]

Posthumous releases and productions
Jackson's posthumous releases and productions are administered by the estate of Michael Jackson, which owns Jackson's trademarks and rights to his name, image and likeness.[375] The first posthumous Jackson song, "This Is It", co-written in the 1980s with Paul Anka, was released in October 2009. The surviving Jackson brothers reunited to record backing vocals.[376] It was followed by a documentary film about the rehearsals for the canceled This Is It tour, Michael Jackson's This Is It,[377] and a compilation album.[378] Despite a limited two-week engagement, the film became the highest-grossing documentary or concert film ever, with earnings of more than $260 million worldwide.[379] Jackson's estate received 90% of the profits.[380] In late 2010, Sony released the first posthumous album, Michael, and the lead single "Hold My Hand", a duet with Akon. The Jackson collaborator will.i.am expressed disgust, saying that Jackson would not have approved the release.[381]

The video game developer Ubisoft released a music game featuring Jackson for the 2010 holiday season, Michael Jackson: The Experience. It was among the first games to use Kinect and PlayStation Move, the motion-detecting camera systems for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3.[382] In April 2011, Mohamed Al-Fayed, the chairman of Fulham Football Club, unveiled a statue of Jackson outside the club stadium, Craven Cottage.[383] It was moved to the National Football Museum in Manchester in May 2014,[384] and removed from display in March 2019 following renewed sexual assault allegations.[385]

In October 2011, the theater company Cirque du Soleil launched Michael Jackson: The Immortal World Tour, a $57-million production,[386] in Montreal, with a permanent show resident in Las Vegas.[387] A larger and more theatrical Cirque show, Michael Jackson: One, designed for residency at the Mandalay Bay resort in Las Vegas, opened on May 23, 2013, in a renovated theater.[388][389]

In 2012, in an attempt to end a family dispute, Jackson's brother Jermaine retracted his signature on a public letter criticizing executors of Jackson's estate and his mother's advisors over the legitimacy of his brother's will.[390] T.J. Jackson, the son of Tito Jackson, was given co-guardianship of Michael Jackson's children after false reports of Katherine Jackson going missing.[391] Xscape, an album of unreleased material, was released on May 13, 2014.[392] The lead single, a duet between Jackson and Justin Timberlake, "Love Never Felt So Good", reached number 9 on the US Billboard Hot 100, making Jackson the first artist to have a top-10 single on the chart in five different decades.[393]

Later in 2014, Queen released a duet recorded with Jackson in the 1980s.[66] A compilation album, Scream, was released on September 29, 2017.[394] A jukebox musical, MJ the Musical, premiered on Broadway in 2022.[395] Myles Frost won the 2022 Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical for his portrayal of Jackson.[396] On November 18, 2022, Epic released a 40th-anniversary edition reissue of Thriller.[397][398] A biographical film based on Jackson's life, Michael, directed by Antoine Fuqua, is scheduled for October 2025.[399] Jackson is played by his nephew Jaafar Jackson. Deadline Hollywood reported that the film "will not shy away from the controversies of Jackson's life".[400] Since Jackson's death, his estate has grossed $2 billion in ticket revenue from MJ the Musical, Michael Jackson's This Is It and two Cirque du Soleil productions.[401]

Posthumous child sexual abuse allegations
In 2013, choreographer Wade Robson filed a lawsuit alleging that Jackson had sexually abused him for seven years, beginning when he was seven years old (1989–1996).[402] In 2014, a case was filed by James Safechuck, alleging similar sexual abuse over a four-year period starting when Safechuck was ten (1988–1992).[403][404][405] Both had previously testified in Jackson's defense during the 1993 allegations; Robson did so again in 2005.[406][407] In 2015, Robson's case against Jackson's estate was dismissed as it had been filed too late. Safechuck's claim was also time-barred.[408]

In 2017, it was ruled that Jackson's corporations could not be held accountable for his alleged past actions.[409][410] The rulings were appealed. On October 20, 2020, Safechuck's lawsuit against Jackson's corporations was again dismissed. The judge ruled that there was no evidence that Safechuck had had a relationship with Jackson's corporation, nor was it proven that there was a special relationship between the two.[411][412][413][414] On April 26, 2021, Robson's case was dismissed because of a lack of supporting evidence that the defendants exercised control over Jackson.[415]

Robson and Safechuck's allegations were the subject of the documentary film Leaving Neverland, released in March 2019.[416] Radio stations in New Zealand, Canada, the UK and the Netherlands removed Jackson's music from their playlists.[417][418][419] Jackson's family condemned the film as a "public lynching",[420] and the Jackson estate released a statement calling the film a "tabloid character assassination [Jackson] endured in life, and now in death".[421] Close associates of Jackson, such as Corey Feldman, Aaron Carter, Brett Barnes, and Macaulay Culkin, defended Jackson in the wake of the documentary's release, saying that Jackson had never molested them.[422][423][424]

Documentaries such as Square One: Michael Jackson, Neverland Firsthand: Investigating the Michael Jackson Documentary and Michael Jackson: Chase the Truth, presented information countering the claims suggested by Leaving Neverland.[425][426][427] Jackson's album sales increased following the documentary screenings.[428] Billboard senior editor Gail Mitchell said she and a colleague interviewed about thirty music executives who believed Jackson's legacy could withstand the controversy.[429] In late 2019, some New Zealand and Canadian radio stations re-added Jackson's music to their playlists, citing "positive listener survey results".[430][431]

On February 21, 2019, the Jackson estate sued HBO for breaching a non-disparagement clause from a 1992 contract. The suit sought to compel HBO to participate in a non-confidential arbitration that could result in $100 million or more in damages awarded to the estate.[432] HBO said they did not breach a contract and filed an anti-SLAPP motion against the estate. In September 2019, Judge George H. Wu denied HBO's motion to dismiss the case, allowing the Jackson estate to arbitrate.[433] HBO appealed, but in December 2020 the appeals court affirmed Wu's ruling.[434]

In 2020, a state law passed in California which granted plaintiffs in child sex abuse cases an additional period to file lawsuits. In October 2020 and again in April 2021, the Los Angeles County Superior Court ruled that MJJ Productions Inc. and MJJ Ventures Inc. employees were not legally obligated to protect the two men from Jackson. In August 2023, California's Second District Court of Appeal overturned the ruling, and the case was approved to move forward to trial court.[435]

Legacy
Main article: Cultural impact of Michael Jackson
See also: List of Michael Jackson records and achievements

Jackson at the White House in 1984. President Ronald Reagan described him as "one of the most talented, most popular and most exciting superstars"[436]
Jackson has been referred to as the "King of Pop" for having transformed the art of music videos and paving the way for modern pop music. For much of Jackson's career, he had an unparalleled worldwide influence over the younger generation.[437] His influence extended beyond the music industry; he impacted dance, led fashion trends, and raised awareness for global affairs.[438] Jackson's music and videos fostered racial diversity in MTV's roster and steered its focus from rock to pop music and R&B, leading to the discontinuation of the album-oriented rock format previously dominant on the channel.[39][439] In songs such as "Black or White", "Heal the World", "Earth Song" and "They Don't Care About Us", Jackson's music emphasized racial integration and environmentalism and protested injustice.[440][441] He is considered one of the most significant figures of the 20th century,[442] and his contributions to music, dance, and fashion, along with his publicized personal life, made him a global figure in popular culture for over four decades.[443][444][445][446]

Jackson's meteoric rise in the 1980s catapulted him to global stardom, and his influence transcended borders. In Africa, his influence was compared to Nelson Mandela for his ability to inspire and unite diverse audiences through his music.[447][448] Similarly, in India, Jackson was likened to Mahatma Gandhi, with his art championing themes of social justice and humanitarianism,[449] and his influence extending to Bollywood where it was said that anyone who danced well was compared to Jackson.[447] In Europe, Jackson's impact was compared to that of the Pope, drawing huge crowds of people who gathered to see the singer in public and even more to his concerts, which spread messages of love and healing during rough economic and political times.[450] His presence in the Middle East was considered as widespread as Coca-Cola, symbolizing a shared global culture through his music.[451] Additionally, Jackson is considered the backbone of the K-pop industry in South Korea, influencing countless artists and shaping the genre's development.[452][453]

Trying to trace Michael Jackson's influence on the pop stars that followed him is like trying to trace the influence of oxygen and gravity. So vast, far-reaching and was his impact—particularly in the wake of Thriller's colossal and heretofore unmatched commercial success—that there weren't a whole lot of artists who weren't trying to mimic some of the Jackson formula.

— J. Edward Keyes of Rolling Stone[454]
Danyel Smith, chief content officer of Vibe Media Group and the editor-in-chief of Vibe, described Jackson as "the greatest star".[455] Steve Huey of AllMusic called him "an unstoppable juggernaut, possessed of all the skills to dominate the charts seemingly at will: an instantly identifiable voice, eye-popping dance moves, stunning musical versatility and loads of sheer star power".[5] BET said Jackson was "quite simply the greatest entertainer of all time" whose "sound, style, movement and legacy continues to inspire artists of all genres".[456] In 1984, Time pop critic Jay Cocks wrote that "Jackson is the biggest thing since the Beatles. He is the hottest single phenomenon since Elvis Presley. He just may be the most popular black singer ever." He described Jackson as a "star of records, radio, rock video. A one-man rescue team for the music business. A songwriter who sets the beat for a decade. A dancer with the fanciest feet on the street. A singer who cuts across all boundaries of taste and style, and color too."[89] In 2003, The Daily Telegraph writer Tom Utley described Jackson as "extremely important" and a "genius".[457] At Jackson's memorial service on July 7, 2009, Motown founder Berry Gordy called Jackson "the greatest entertainer that ever lived".[458][459] Jackson is recognized as the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time by Guinness World Records.[460][461] He has also appeared on Rolling Stone's lists of the Greatest Singers of All Time.[462][463]


A 1992 Romanian postal cover honoring Jackson's 1992 concert in Bucharest
Craig Glenday, the Editor-in-Chief of Guinness World Records, called Jackson the most famous person in the world in 2006. Following Jackson's death, Glenday wrote in an obituary that Jackson had maintained this status up until his death,[464] later remarking that his fame had exceeded that of Confucius.[465] The Guardian wrote that he was in a league of his own in terms of fame, noting that Jackson had become so famous that the number of people who might not know who he was had become statistically insignificant.[466] Due to his unprecedented influence, Jackson is recognized today as one of the most globally renowned figures in history. Reports of his fame extend from the Middle East,[467][468] Africa,[447][469] India,[470][471] and China[472][473] to tribes in the Amazon.[474] His influence even reaches remote corners of the world such as São Tomé and Príncipe, or Tristan da Cunha, where tribute artists keep his legacy alive by celebrating his music.[475][476]

In 2018, the National Portrait Gallery named Jackson the most depicted cultural figure of the century,[477] later stating that Jackson's influence on art rivaled that of Jesus Christ.[478] Nicholas Cullinan, director of the National Portrait Gallery and curator of the Michael Jackson: On the Wall exhibition, described Jackson's impact on art as unprecedented and claimed in 2018 that Jackson was the most depicted figure in the history of contemporary art.[479] In 2014, a comprehensive study conducted by researcher Young-Ho Eom at the University of Toulouse identified Jackson as one of the most influential people of all time.[480] The study utilized advanced ranking methods, including 2D Rank and PageRank algorithms, to analyze the impact of historical figures. Jackson was prominently placed on the list of top influencers, alongside Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus, Adolf Hitler, and Jesus Christ. An additional study conducted in 2013 also identified Jackson as one of the most influential people of all time. This study ranked Jackson at the top of the list, alongside Napoleon Bonaparte, highlighting the extraordinary influence and global recognition that Jackson achieved throughout his career.[481] Additionally, numerous publications and academic studies [482] have recognized Michael Jackson as one of the most influential figures in history, noting his impact beyond music in fields such as psychology, law, chemistry, and engineering. [483][484][485]

Philanthropy and humanitarian work
Main article: Philanthropy of Michael Jackson
Duration: 7 minutes and 1 second.7:01
President Ronald Reagan rewarding Jackson in 1984 for his support of alcohol and drug abuse charities
Jackson is widely regarded as having been a prolific philanthropist and humanitarian.[486][487][488][489] Jackson's early charitable work has been described by The Chronicle of Philanthropy as having "paved the way for the current surge in celebrity philanthropy",[490] and by the Los Angeles Times as having "set the standard for generosity for other entertainers".[486]

By some estimates, he donated over $500 million, not accounting for inflation, to various charities over the course of his life.[486] In 1992, Jackson established his Heal the World Foundation, to which he donated several million dollars in revenue from his Dangerous World Tour.[491]

Jackson's philanthropic activities went beyond just monetary donations. He also performed at benefit concerts, some of which he arranged.[492] He gifted tickets for his regular concert performances to groups that assist underprivileged children.[493] He visited sick children in hospitals around the world.[494]

Jackson donated valuable, personal and professional paraphernalia for numerous charity auctions. He received various awards and accolades for his philanthropic work, including two bestowed by presidents of the United States. The vast breadth of Jackson's philanthropic work has earned recognition in the Guinness World Records.[486][495][496]

On May 14, 1984, President Ronald Reagan gave Jackson an award recognizing his support of alcohol and drug abuse charities,[497] and in recognition of his support for the Ad Council's and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's Drunk Driving Prevention campaign. Jackson allowed the campaign to use "Beat It" for its public service announcements.[498]

Artistry
Vocal style


Jackson performing during the Dangerous World Tour in Bucharest in 1992
Jackson was known as an expressive vocalist with absolute pitch.[499][500][501] Critics describe his vocal theatricality having a range from clear and soft to harsh and aggressive,[502][503][504][505] depending on the genre sung. Principally in history, Jackson is the sole recipient to receive Grammy Awards for three different genres of vocal performance (as a soloist), winning Pop Vocal for "Thriller", Rock Vocal for "Beat It", and Rhythm and Blues Vocal with both "Billie Jean" and "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough". Bruce Swedien, his long-time sound engineer, emphasized that a critical element of their vocal recordings are of him and Jackson trying numerous approaches to rhythmic, emotional and technical distinctions to consummate a "sonic character".[506] His stylings, such as common use of staccato, legato, falsetto as well as vocal hiccups,[507] adlibs, wailings and growls are all signature to his sound.[508][509]

Jackson sang from childhood, and over time his voice and vocal style changed. Between 1971 and 1975, his voice descended from boy soprano to lyric tenor.[510] He was known for his intonation and vocal range.[462] Through each music release, his vocal development and changes were positively narrated by music journalists. With the arrival of Off the Wall in the late 1970s, Jackson's abilities in his coming-of-age period had Rolling Stone comparing his vocals to the "breathless, dreamy stutter" of Stevie Wonder, and wrote that "Jackson's feathery-timbred tenor is extraordinarily beautiful. It slides smoothly into a startling falsetto that's used very daringly."[511] By the time of 1982's Thriller, Rolling Stone wrote that Jackson was singing in a "fully adult voice" that was "tinged by sadness".[512] The turn of the 1990s saw the release of the introspective album Dangerous. The New York Times noted that on some tracks, "he gulps for breath, his voice quivers with anxiety or drops to a desperate whisper, hissing through clenched teeth" and he had a "wretched tone". When singing of brotherhood or self-esteem the musician would return to "smooth" vocals.[513] Of Invincible, Rolling Stone wrote that, at 43, Jackson still performed "exquisitely voiced rhythm tracks and vibrating vocal harmonies".[514] Joseph Vogel notes Jackson's ability to use non-verbal sounds to express emotion.[515] Neil McCormick wrote that Jackson's unorthodox singing style "was original and utterly distinctive".[516]

Influences
Jackson was influenced by musicians including James Brown, Little Richard, Jackie Wilson, Diana Ross, Fred Astaire, Sammy Davis Jr., Gene Kelly,[517] and David Ruffin.[518] Little Richard had a substantial influence on Jackson,[519] but Brown was his greatest inspiration. When Jackson was a small child, his mother would wake him whenever Brown appeared on television. Jackson described being "mesmerized".[520]

Jackson's vocal technique was influenced by Diana Ross; his use of the oooh interjection from a young age was something Ross had used on many of her songs with the Supremes.[521] She was a mother figure to him, and he often watched her rehearse.[522] He said he had learned a lot from watching how she moved and sang, and that she had encouraged him to have confidence in himself.[523]

Choreographer David Winters, who met Jackson while choreographing the 1971 Diana Ross TV special Diana!, said that Jackson watched the musical West Side Story almost every week, and it was his favorite film; he paid tribute to it in "Beat It" and the "Bad" video.[524][525][526]

Musicianship
Jackson had no formal music training and could not read or write music notation. He is credited for playing guitar, keyboard, and drums, but was not proficient in them.[527] When composing, he recorded ideas by beatboxing and imitating instruments vocally.[527] Describing the process, he said: "I'll just sing the bass part into the tape recorder. I'll take that bass lick and put the chords of the melody over the bass lick and that's what inspires the melody." These were shown in his demos for "Beat It" and "Billie Jean" where he vocalized the melody, bass instrumentals as well as lead and backing vocals by overlaying each component. The engineer Robert Hoffman recalled that after Jackson came in with a song he had written overnight, Jackson sang every note of every chord to a guitar player. Hoffman also remembered Jackson singing string arrangements part by part into a cassette recorder.[527]


Dance
Jackson danced from a young age as part of the Jackson 5,[528] and incorporated dance extensively in his performances and music videos.[528] According to Sanjoy Roy of The Guardian, Jackson would "flick and retract his limbs like switchblades, or snap out of a tornado spin into a perfectly poised toe-stand".[528] The moonwalk, taught to him by Jeffrey Daniel,[77] was Jackson's signature dance move and one of the most famous of the 20th century.[529] Jackson is credited for coining the name "moonwalk" for this street dance move, previously known as the "backslide".[530][531] His other moves included the robot,[45][532] crotch grab, and the "anti-gravity" lean of the "Smooth Criminal" video.[528]

Themes and genres
Black and white photo of Jackson holding a microphone and singing.
Jackson during his Bad tour in Vienna, June 1988
Jackson explored genres including pop,[5][533] soul,[5][160] rhythm and blues,[533] funk,[534] rock,[533][534] disco,[535] post-disco,[534] dance-pop,[536] and new jack swing.[5] Steve Huey of AllMusic wrote that Thriller refined the strengths of Off the Wall; the dance and rock tracks were more aggressive, while the pop tunes and ballads were softer and more soulful.[5] Its tracks included the ballads "The Lady in My Life", "Human Nature", and "The Girl Is Mine",[512][537][538] the funk pieces "Billie Jean" and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'",[512][537] and the disco set "Baby Be Mine" and "P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)".[538]

With Off the Wall, Jackson's "vocabulary of grunts, squeals, hiccups, moans, and asides" vividly showed his maturation into an adult, Robert Christgau wrote in Christgau's Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies (1981). The album's title track suggested to the critic a parallel between Jackson and Stevie Wonder's "oddball" music personas: "Since childhood his main contact with the real world has been on stage and in bed."[539] With Thriller, Christopher Connelly of Rolling Stone commented that Jackson developed his long association with the subliminal theme of paranoia and darker imagery.[512] AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted this on the songs "Billie Jean" and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'".[537] In "Billie Jean", Jackson depicts an obsessive fan who alleges he has fathered her child,[5] and in "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'" he argues against gossip and the media.[512] "Beat It" decried gang violence in a homage to West Side Story, and was Jackson's first successful rock cross-over piece, according to Huey.[5][35] He observed that "Thriller" began Jackson's interest with the theme of the supernatural, a topic he revisited in subsequent years. In 1985, Jackson co-wrote the charity anthem "We Are the World"; humanitarian themes later became a recurring theme in his lyrics and public persona.[5]

A black jacket with five round golden medals on its left and right shoulders, a gold band on its left arm sleeve, and two belt straps on the right bottom sleeve. Underneath the jacket is a golden belt, with a round ornament in its center.
Jackson's Bad-era jacket on display at the Hollywood Guinness World Records Museum
In Bad, Jackson's concept of the predatory lover is seen on the rock song "Dirty Diana".[540] The lead single "I Just Can't Stop Loving You" is a traditional love ballad, and "Man in the Mirror" is a ballad of confession and resolution. "Smooth Criminal" is an evocation of bloody assault, rape and likely murder.[136] AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine states that Dangerous presents Jackson as a paradoxical person.[541] The first half of the record is dedicated to new jack swing, including songs like "Jam" and "Remember the Time". It was the first Jackson album in which social ills became a primary theme; "Why You Wanna Trip on Me", for example, protests world hunger, AIDS, homelessness and drugs. Dangerous contains sexually charged songs such as "In the Closet". The title track continues the theme of the predatory lover and compulsive desire. The second half includes introspective, pop-gospel anthems such as "Will You Be There", "Heal the World", and "Keep the Faith".[513] In the ballad "Gone Too Soon", Jackson gives tribute to Ryan White and the plight of those with AIDS.[542]

HIStory creates an atmosphere of paranoia.[543] In the new jack swing-funk rock tracks "Scream" and "Tabloid Junkie", and the R&B ballad "You Are Not Alone", Jackson retaliates against the injustice and isolation he feels, and directs his anger at the media.[544] In the introspective ballad "Stranger in Moscow", Jackson laments his "fall from grace"; "Earth Song", "Childhood", "Little Susie", and "Smile" are operatic pop songs.[543][544] In "D.S.", Jackson attacks lawyer Thomas W. Sneddon Jr., who had prosecuted him in both child sexual abuse cases; he describes Sneddon as a white supremacist who wanted to "get my ass, dead or alive".[545] Invincible includes urban soul tracks such as "Cry" and "The Lost Children", ballads such as "Speechless", "Break of Dawn", and "Butterflies", and mixes hip hop, pop, and R&B in "2000 Watts", "Heartbreaker", and "Invincible".[546][547]

Music videos and choreography

Thriller - Live show poster
Jackson released "Thriller", a 14-minute music video directed by John Landis, in 1983.[548] The zombie-themed video "defined music videos and broke racial barriers" on MTV, which had launched two years earlier.[39] Before Thriller, Jackson struggled to receive coverage on MTV, allegedly because he was African American.[549] Pressure from CBS Records persuaded MTV to start showing "Billie Jean" and later "Beat It", which led to a lengthy partnership with Jackson, and helped other black music artists gain recognition.[550] The popularity of his videos on MTV helped the relatively new channel's viewing figures, and MTV's focus shifted toward pop and R&B.[550][551] His performance on Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever changed the scope of live stage shows, making it acceptable for artists to lip-sync to music video on stage.[552] The choreography in Thriller has been copied in Indian films and prisons in the Philippines.[553] Thriller marked an increase in scale for music videos, and was named the most successful music video ever by the Guinness World Records.[239]

In "Bad"'s 19-minute video—directed by Martin Scorsese—Jackson used sexual imagery and choreography, and touched his chest, torso and crotch. When asked by Winfrey in the 1993 interview about why he grabbed his crotch, he said it was spontaneously compelled by the music. Time magazine described the "Bad" video as "infamous". It featured Wesley Snipes; Jackson's later videos often featured famous cameo roles.[554][555] For the "Smooth Criminal" video, Jackson experimented with leaning forward at a 45-degree angle, beyond the performer's center of gravity. To accomplish this live, Jackson and designers developed a special shoe to lock the performer's feet to the stage, allowing them to lean forward. They were granted U.S. patent 5,255,452 for the device.[556] The video for "Leave Me Alone" was not officially released in the US, but in 1989 was nominated for three Billboard Music Video Awards[557] and won a Golden Lion Award for its special effects. It won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form.[60]

A man is singing into a microphone under a spotlight. He wears a blue open-neck shirt over a white T-shirt, and dark pants. There are two colorfully-dressed men on either side of him.
Jackson (center) performing a dance sequence of "The Way You Make Me Feel" at the Bad World Tour in 1988
He received the MTV Video Vanguard Award in 1988; in 2001 the award was renamed in his honor.[558] The "Black or White" video simultaneously premiered on November 14, 1991, in 27 countries with an estimated audience of 500 million people, the largest audience ever for a music video at the time.[176] Along with Jackson, it featured Macaulay Culkin, Peggy Lipton, and George Wendt. It helped introduce morphing to music videos.[559] It was controversial for scenes in which Jackson rubs his crotch, vandalizes cars, and throws a garbage can through a storefront. He apologized and removed the final scene of the video.[164]

"In the Closet" featured Naomi Campbell in a courtship dance with Jackson.[560] "Remember the Time" was set in ancient Egypt, and featured Eddie Murphy, Iman, and Magic Johnson.[561] The video for "Scream", directed by Mark Romanek and production designer Tom Foden, gained a record 11 MTV Video Music Award Nominations, and won "Best Dance Video", "Best Choreography", and "Best Art Direction".[562] The song and its video are Jackson's response to being accused of child molestation in 1993.[563] A year later, it won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form. It has been reported as the most expensive music video ever made, at $7 million;[564] Romanek has contradicted this.[565] The "Earth Song" video was nominated for the 1997 Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form.[566]

Michael Jackson's Ghosts, a short film written by Jackson and Stephen King and directed by Stan Winston, premiered at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival. At over 38 minutes long, it held the Guinness world record for the longest music video until 2013, when it was eclipsed by the video for the Pharrell Williams song "Happy".[567] The 2001 video for "You Rock My World" lasts over 13 minutes, was directed by Paul Hunter, and features Chris Tucker and Marlon Brando.[568] It won an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Music Video in 2002.[569]

In December 2009, the Library of Congress selected "Thriller" as the only music video to be preserved in the National Film Registry, as a work of "enduring importance to American culture".[570][571] Huey wrote that Jackson transformed the music video into an artform and a promotional tool through complex story lines, dance routines, special effects and famous cameos, while breaking down racial barriers.[5]

Honors and awards
See also: List of awards and nominations received by Michael Jackson

Jackson and President George H. W. Bush at the White House on April 5, 1990. It was the second time that Jackson had been honored by a president of the United States.
Jackson is one of the best selling music artists in history,[572] with sales estimated of over 500 million records worldwide.[573][574][575][Note 2] He had 13 number-one singles in the US in his solo career—more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era at the time of his death.[576] He was invited and honored by a president of the United States at the White House three times. In 1984, he was honored with a "Presidential Public Safety Commendation" award by Ronald Reagan for his humanitarian endeavors.[577] In 1990, he was honored as the "Artist of the Decade", which was awarded by the National Children's Museum, by George H. W. Bush.[578] In 1992, he was honored as a "Point of Light Ambassador" by Bush for inviting disadvantaged children to his Neverland Ranch.[579]

Jackson won hundreds of awards, making him one of the most-awarded artists in popular music.[580] His awards include 39 Guinness World Records, including the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time,[460][461] 13 Grammy Awards,[581] as well as the Grammy Legend Award[582] and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award,[583] and 26 American Music Awards, including the Artist of the Century and Artist of the 1980s.[261] He also received the World Music Awards' Best-Selling Male Artist of the Millennium and the Bambi Pop Artist of the Millennium Award.[262][584] Jackson was inducted onto the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1980 as a member of the Jacksons, and in 1984 as a solo artist. He was inducted to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Vocal Group Hall of Fame as a member of the Jackson 5 in 1997 and 1999,[585] respectively, and again as a solo artist in 2001.[586] In 2002, he was added to the Songwriters Hall of Fame.[587] In 2010, he was the first recording artist to be inducted into the Dance Hall of Fame,[588] and in 2014, he was posthumously inducted into the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame.[589] In 2021, he was among the inaugural inductees into the Black Music & Entertainment Walk of Fame.[590]

In 1988, Fisk University honored him with an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters.[591] In 1992, he was invested as a titular king of Sanwi, a traditional kingdom located in the south-east of Ivory Coast.[592] In July 2009, the Lunar Republic Society named a crater on the Moon after Jackson.[593] In August, for what would have been Jackson's 51st birthday, Google dedicated their Google Doodle to him.[594] In 2012, the extinct hermit crab Mesoparapylocheles michaeljacksoni was named in his honor.[595] In 2014, the British Council of Cultural Relations deemed Jackson's life one of the 80 most important cultural moments of the 20th century.[596] World Vitiligo Day has been celebrated on June 25, the anniversary of Jackson's death, to raise awareness of the auto-immune disorder that Jackson suffered from.[597]

Earnings
Main article: Estate of Michael Jackson
In 1989, Jackson's annual earnings from album sales, endorsements, and concerts were estimated at $125 million.[239] Forbes placed Jackson's annual income at $35 million in 1996 and $20 million in 1997.[598] Jackson has been one of the wealthiest celebrities and musical artists; estimates of Jackson's net worth during his life range from negative $285 million to positive $350 million for 2002, 2003 and 2007.[599][600] Forbes reported in August 2018 that Jackson's total career pretax earnings in life and death were $4.2 billion.[601][602] Sales of his recordings through Sony's music unit earned him an estimated $300 million in royalties. He may have earned another $400 million from concerts, music publishing (including his share of the Beatles catalog), endorsements, merchandising and music videos.[603]

In 2013, the executors of Jackson's estate filed a petition in the United States Tax Court as a result of a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) over estate taxes.[604] The executors claimed that it was worth about $7 million, while the IRS that it was worth over $1.1 billion. In February 2014, the IRS reported that Jackson's estate owed $702 million; $505 million in taxes, and $197 million in penalties.[605] In 2021, the Tax Court issued a ruling in favor of the estate, ruling that the estate's total combined value of the estate was $111.5 million and that the value of Jackson's name and likeness was $4 million.[606]

In 2016, Forbes estimated annual gross earnings by the Jackson Estate at $825 million, the largest ever recorded for a celebrity, mostly due to the sale of the Sony/ATV catalog.[607] In 2018, the figure was $400 million,[608] bringing Jackson's postmortem total to $2.4 billion.[609] Forbes has consistently recognized Jackson as one of the top-earning dead celebrities, and placed him at the top spot from 2013 to 2023.[610][611]

Discography
Main articles: Michael Jackson albums discography, Michael Jackson singles discography, and List of songs recorded by Michael Jackson
See also: The Jackson 5 discography
Got to Be There (1972)
Ben (1972)
Music & Me (1973)
Forever, Michael (1975)
Off the Wall (1979)
Thriller (1982)
Bad (1987)
Dangerous (1991)
HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I (1995)
Invincible (2001)
Filmography
See also: Michael Jackson videography
The Wiz (1978)
Michael Jackson's Thriller (1983)
Captain EO (1986)
Moonwalker (1988)
Michael Jackson: The Legend Continues (1989)
Michael Jackson's Ghosts (1997)
Men in Black II (2002)
Miss Cast Away and the Island Girls (2004)
Michael Jackson's This Is It (2009)
Bad 25 (2012)
Michael Jackson's Journey from Motown to Off the Wall (2016)
Thriller 40 (2023)
Tours
Main article: List of Michael Jackson concerts
Bad World Tour (1987–1989)
Dangerous World Tour (1992–1993)
HIStory World Tour (1996–1997)
See also
List of dancers
Notes
 The estimates of Michael Jackson's record sales vary up to 1 billion records worldwide.[2][3]
 Blanket changed his name to "Bigi" in 2015.
 In 2018, its US sales record was overtaken by the Eagles' album Greatest Hits 1971–75, with 38× platinum.[372]
References
Citations
 Villarreal, Yvonne (June 29, 2009). "Remembering Michael Jackson: "The Greatest Entertainer of All Time"". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 16, 2025. "Michael Jackson Was The Most Influential Entertainer Of The 20th Century & Shaped The Future Of Music, Dance & Film". OK!. December 6, 2022. Retrieved December 24, 2024. Satariano, Adam (July 8, 2009). "Family, Fans Mourn Jackson at Site of Final Rehearsal". Bloomberg News. Retrieved January 16, 2025. the greatest entertainer that ever lived. Bennett, Jessica (December 31, 2024). "The Greatest Live Performer Of Every Decade, 1950-Present". Vibe. Retrieved January 16, 2025. Widely considered the greatest performer of all time, Michael Jackson Ratliff, Michaela (August 29, 2024). "'The greatest artist who ever lived': Michael Jackson leaves impact 15 years after death". Yahoo! News. Retrieved January 16, 2025. Stone, Rolling (June 5, 2010). "Michael Jackson Immortalized". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 25, 2024. Michael Jackson, the greatest pop artist that ever lived
 "Billboard Music Awards 2014: Michael Jackson hologram steals the show". The Daily Telegraph. May 19, 2014. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved June 30, 2024.
 "New Michael Jackson Song, 'Love Never Felt So Good,' Features Justin Timberlake". HuffPost. Reuters. May 1, 2014. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2024.
 County of Los Angeles Department of Health Services (2009). Michael Jackson death certificate.
 Huey, Steve. "Michael Jackson – Artist Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on May 7, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Barnes, Brokes (June 25, 2009). "A Star Idolized and Haunted, Michael Jackson Dies at 50". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2009.
 "Michael Jackson: 10 Achievements That Made Him The King of Pop". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. June 24, 2014. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2016.
 Jackson 2009, p. 26.
 Young 2009, p. 18.
 Young 2009, pp. 17, 19.
 Petridis, Alexis (June 27, 2018). "Joe Jackson was one of the most monstrous fathers in pop". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2019.
 Sweeting, Adam (June 27, 2018). "Joe Jackson obituary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Young 2009, pp. 18–19.
 Knopper 2016, p. 6. Note: No tribal affiliation named in source.
 Morris, Chris (June 27, 2018). "Joe Jackson, Jackson Family Patriarch, Dies at 89". Variety. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson: a life of highs and lows". The Daily Telegraph. June 26, 2009. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved November 28, 2019.
 Jackson, Jermaine (2011). You Are Not Alone: Michael: Through a Brother's Eyes. Simon & Schuster. p. 41. ISBN 978-1-4516-5156-0. Archived from the original on July 28, 2023. Retrieved November 28, 2019.
 "Jackson interview seen by 14 m". BBC News. February 4, 2003. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Lewis Jones 2005, pp. 165–168.
 "Can Michael Jackson's demons be explained?". BBC News. June 27, 2009. Archived from the original on September 28, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Katherine Jackson: Michael's strict upbringing not abuse (video). CNN. May 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Duke, Alan (July 21, 2009). "Joe Jackson denies abusing Michael". CNN. Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jackson Brothers: Was Joe Jackson Abusive?". Yahoo! Celebrity. Archived from the original on May 22, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Young 2009, p. 24.
 Burton, Charlie (February 7, 2018). "Inside the Jackson machine". GQ. Archived from the original on October 7, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 13–14.
 Young 2009, pp. 21–22.
 "Triumph & Tragedy: The Life of Michael Jackson". Rolling Stone India. August 25, 2009. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Young 2009, p. 22.
 Young 2009, p. 21.
 Knopper, Steve (July 23, 2017). "Bobby Taylor, Motown Singer Who Discovered Jackson 5, Dead at 83". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 59–69.
 Harper, Phillip Brian (Winter 1989). "Synesthesia, "Crossover," and Blacks in Popular Music". Social Text (23): 110. doi:10.2307/466423. ISSN 0164-2472. JSTOR 466423.
 Easlea, Daryl (2016). Michael Jackson: Rewind: The Life and Legacy of Pop Music's King. Race Point Publishing. p. 178. ISBN 978-1-63106-253-7.
 "Michael Jackson – Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 2, 2008.
 Aletti, Vince (November 26, 1970). "Jackson Five: The Biggest Thing Since the Stones". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2020.
 Bronson, Fred (November 15, 2017). "48 Years Ago Today, 'I Want You Back' Kicked It All Off for the Jackson 5". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 81–82.
 Young 2009, p. 25.
 McNulty, Bernadette (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson's music: the solo albums". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 98–99.
 Alban, Debra (June 28, 2009). "Michael Jackson broke down racial barriers" (Press release). CNN. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Brown, Helen (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson and Motown: the boy behind the marketing". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 St John 2004, p. 51.
 Mansour 2005, p. 403: 'The Robot was a mimelike dance, popularized by The Jackson 5 and their Top Ten hit "Dancing Machine"'
 Huey, Steve. "The Jackson 5 – Artist Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 138–144.
 "The Jackson 5 Biography". Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Gibron, Bill (July 7, 2009). "You Can't Win Michael Jackson and 'The Wiz'". PopMatters. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved May 10, 2017.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 178–179.
 Bronson 2003, p. 207.
 "Who's bad? Michael Jackson's estate owes Quincy Jones $9.4m in royalties, jury decides". The Guardian. Associated Press. July 27, 2017. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Leight, Elias (February 5, 2015). "10 Things We Learned from Spike Lee's Michael Jackson Doc". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. Retrieved January 27, 2017.
 "Michael Jackson 'was addicted to surgery', mother claims". The Daily Telegraph. November 8, 2010. Retrieved June 18, 2024.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 205–210.
 Trust, Gary (January 21, 2018). "Ask Billboard: Remembering the Time When Michael Jackson Kept Hitting the Hot 100's Top 10, From 'Thriller' to 'Dangerous'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 10, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson: Off The Wall". Virgin Media. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Donna Summer and Michael Jackson sweep Annual American Music Awards". The Ledger. Associated Press. January 20, 1980. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Peters, Ida (February 2, 1980). "Donna No. 1, Pop and Soul; Michael Jackson King of Soul". The Afro-American. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. February 15, 2019. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved April 7, 2019.
 "Few Surprises in Music Awards". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. Associated Press. February 1, 1981. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Taraborrelli 2009, p. 188.
 Taraborrelli 2009, p. 191.
 Locker, Melissa (July 29, 2013). "Michael Jackson and Freddie Mercury: Three Duets Coming Out This Fall". Time. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 26, 2015.
 "The real Freddie Mercury: why the Queen biopic only tells part of the story". The Times. October 19, 2018. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2018.
 Greene, Andy (September 19, 2014). "Hear Michael Jackson and Freddie Mercury's Long-Lost Duet". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved April 26, 2016.
 Earls, John (August 2, 2014). "Producer of new Queen album featuring Freddie Mercury and Michael Jackson vocals is revealed". NME. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "Michael: He's Not Just the Rock Star of the Year, He's the Rock Star of the '80s". The Philadelphia Inquirer. December 20, 1983. Archived from the original on September 4, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Cash register's ring sweet music to record industry". The Gadsden Times. Associated Press. March 26, 1984. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Diamond Awards". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Crookes, Del (May 4, 2012). "Adele's 21 overtakes sales of Thriller in UK album list". Newsbeat. Archived from the original on June 11, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2021.
 Asian News International (ANI) (September 27, 2009). "MJ nearly scrapped 'Thriller' release". Zee News. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2021.
 Lewis Jones 2005, p. 47.
 Williams, Janette (June 24, 2009). "Michael Jackson left indelible mark on Pasadena". Whittier Daily News. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Fatal Cardiac Arrest Strikes Michael Jackson". Emmys.com. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jackson glove sells for $350,000". BBC News. November 22, 2009. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved April 19, 2019.
 Daniel, Jeffrey (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson 1958–2009". Time. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 234–237.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 238–241.
 Kisselgoff, Anna (March 6, 1988). "Stage: The Dancing Feet of Michael Jackson". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Berry Gordy Addresses Michael Jackson Memorial Service". Hark. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Neel, Julia (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson – A Tribute". British Vogue. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2020.
 "Past Winners Search: Bruce Swedien". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2008.
 "Michael Jackson sweeps American Music Awards". Daily News. Associated Press. January 17, 1984. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2010.
 "Winners Database: Search Results for "Michael Jackson"". American Music Awards. American Music Award. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018.
 Hebblethwaite, Phil (November 21, 2013). "How Michael Jackson's Thriller changed music videos for ever". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 18, 2019. Retrieved November 28, 2019.
 Griffin, Nancy (June 24, 2010). "The "Thriller" Diaries". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014. Retrieved November 28, 2019.
 Greenberg, Steve (November 30, 2012). "Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' at 30: How One Album Changed the World". Billboard. Retrieved February 28, 2025.
 Cocks, Jay (March 19, 1984). "Why He's a Thriller". Time. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved April 25, 2010.
 Pareles, Jon (January 14, 1984). "Michael Jackson at 25: A Musical Phenomenon". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 25, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Herrera, Monica (July 3, 2009). "Michael Jackson, Pepsi Made Marketing History". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Story, Louise (December 31, 2007). "Philip B. Dusenberry, 71, Adman, Dies". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Shivaprasad, Sindhu (August 30, 2016). "Reliving the icon who defined music history: The eternal moonwalker, King of Pop – Michael Jackson". Big News Network (Press release). Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 279–287.
 "Michael Jackson Burn Center Closes". Associated Press. August 28, 1987. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021.
 "1984 Michael Jackson Tour". Newsweek. July 15, 1984. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021.
 Vogel, Joseph (September 24, 2017). "Michael Jackson's Forgotten Humanitarian Legacy". HuffPost. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021.
 Lecocq, Richard; Allard, François (2018). Michael Jackson All the Songs: The Story Behind Every Track. London, England: Cassell. ISBN 978-1-78840-057-2. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved December 1, 2021.
 "Past Winners Search: "We Are the World"". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014.
 Doyle, Jack (July 7, 2009). ""Michael & McCartney": 1980s–2009". The Pop History Dig. Archived from the original on June 13, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Breznican, Anthony (June 30, 2009). "The many faces of Michael Jackson". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 5, 2011. Retrieved June 11, 2015.
 "Bruce shows who's Boss". Montreal Gazette. Associated Press. January 28, 1986. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2010.
 Campbell 1993, p. 114.
 Young 2009, pp. 340–344.
 Hilburn, Robert (September 22, 1985). "The long and winding road". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Paul McCartney refused an offer to buy the ATV Catalog for £20 million ($40 million)". Mjjinfo.blogspot.fr. November 13, 2010. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 333–338.
 "Michael Jackson 1958–2009". Today Tonight. June 25, 2009. Coverage of the sale of ATV Music at 2:36 minutes in. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2011.
 Campbell 1995, pp. 14–16.
 Parameswaran 2011, pp. 75–77.
 DeMello 2012, p. 152.
 Rosenberg, Alyssa (February 2, 2016). "To understand Michael Jackson and his skin, you have to go beyond race". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2019.
 Wilson, Jeff (February 12, 1993). "The Aftermath of Michael Jackson and Oprah: What About His Face?". Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2019.
 Kolata, Gina (February 13, 1993). "Doctor Says Michael Jackson Has a Skin Disease". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2019.
 Kreps, Daniel (March 29, 2010). "Search of Michael Jackson's Home Revealed Skin-Whitening Creams". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 434–436.
 "The Michael Jackson Interview: Oprah Reflects". Oprah.com. The Oprah Winfrey Show. September 16, 2009. p. 3. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
 "Arnold Klein, Dermatologist Who Smoothed Stars' Wrinkles, Dies at 70". The New York Times. Associated Press. October 10, 2015. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019.
 Jackson 2009, pp. 229–230.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 312–313.
 "Michael Jackson was addicted to plastic surgery, his mother says". The Sydney Morning Herald. November 10, 2010. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 "Music's misunderstood superstar". BBC News. June 13, 2005. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Taylor, Trey (September 27, 2018). "Hollyweird: Michael Jackson and the Making of Disney's 'Captain EO'". Paper. Archived from the original on October 7, 2023. Retrieved October 1, 2023.
 Durkee, Cutler (September 14, 1987). "Unlike Anyone, Even Himself". People. Vol. 28, no. 11. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved June 29, 2019.
 Goldberg, Michael; Handelman, David (September 24, 1987). "Is Michael Jackson for Real?". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 355–361.
 "Jackson Ups Bid for Skeleton of 'Elephant Man'". Chicago Tribune. United Press International. June 17, 1987. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019.
 Jackson, Michael (September 12, 1997). "Jackson interview with Barbara Walters". 20/20 (Interview). Interviewed by Barbara Walters. ABC.
 Vogel, Joseph (September 9, 2012). "How Michael Jackson Made 'Bad'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. Retrieved July 20, 2019.
 Bevil, Dewayne (June 30, 2010). "What's old is new again as 'Captain EO' returns to Epcot". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2019.
 "Captain EO is Back to Change the World". IGN. February 23, 2010. Archived from the original on September 17, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Johnson, Robert E. (September 1987). "Michael Jackson Comes Back!". Ebony. Vol. 42, no. 11. pp. 143, 148–9. ISSN 0012-9011.
 Jackson, Katherine (October 1990). "Mother of Jackson Family Tells All". Ebony. Vol. 45, no. 12. p. 66. ISSN 0012-9011. In 1987, he left the Jehovah's Witnesses. There was strong opposition to his "Thriller" video on the part of some Witnesses. Perhaps the controversy figured into his decision to leave. But I don't know that for a fact because I didn't talk to him about what he'd done. I couldn't. Witnesses do not discuss spiritual matters with a person who has disassociated himself from the Witnesses, including family members. But I want to stress that, contrary to published reports, I was not required to "shun" my son. Our relationship is as loving today as it was when he was a Witness. I just can't ask him, "Why, Michael?"
 "I Would Never Do It Again!". Awake. Jehovah's Witnesses. May 22, 1984. p. 20. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.
 "The Man in the Mirror". TV Guide. November 10–16, 2001. p. 20. TVG: How did you avoid self-destruction? MJ [Michael Jackson]: I think religion entered in? TVG: Are you still a Jehovah's Witness? MJ: Yeah.
 Cocks, Jay (September 14, 1987). "Music: The Badder They Come". Time. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved April 25, 2010.
 "Michael, Travis top Music Award winners". Lodi News-Sentinel. United Press International. January 30, 1989. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2010.
 "Jackson tour on its way to u.s." Mercury News. January 12, 1988. Archived from the original on August 12, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Lewis Jones 2005, pp. 95–96.
 Harrington, Richard (January 12, 1988). "Jackson to Make First Solo U.S. Tour". The Washington Post. ProQuest 306975947. Archived from the original on February 23, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2013.
 "16 of Michael Jackson's Greatest Non-Musical Achievements". Brainz.org. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Harrington, Richard (October 8, 1988). "PRINCE MICHAEL JACKSON TWO PATHS TO THE TOP OF POP". The Washington Post.
 "Michael Jackson tribute show set to mark 30th anniversary of Bad". South Wales Guardian. May 4, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2025.
 Maloney, Devon (February 22, 2012). "Michael Jackson's 'Bad' Will Turn 25 With Elaborate Box Set". Spin. Retrieved February 28, 2025.
 "Spike Lee to direct Michael Jackson 'Bad' documentary". Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved February 28, 2025.
 "10 Things About Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' 30 Years After Its Release". ABC News. Retrieved February 28, 2025.
 McGovern, Kyle (October 18, 2012). "Spike Lee's 'Bad 25' Trailer Touts Michael Jackson's Greatest Accomplishments". Spin. Retrieved February 28, 2025.
 Vincent, Alice (March 11, 2019). "When Michael Jackson (almost) told all: the story of his bizarre autobiography Moonwalk". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2019.
 Shanahan, Mark; Golstein, Meredith (June 27, 2009). "Remembering Michael". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Best Seller List a Cakewalk for Moonwalk". Associated Press. May 6, 1988. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2019.
 Jackson 2009, pp. 29–31.
 Ditzian, Eric (October 12, 2009). "Michael Jackson's Memoir, 'Moonwalk': Read Excerpts Here!". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019.
 "Michael's Last Tour". Ebony. Vol. 44, no. 6. April 1989. p. 148. ISSN 0012-9011. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved May 7, 2022.
 "Michael Jackson et ses amis". Premiere (in French). June 26, 2009. Archived from the original on May 7, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2022.
 Sullivan, Randall (2012). "South". Untouchable: The Strange Life and Tragic Death of Michael Jackson. Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-4582-6. Archived from the original on October 15, 2023. Retrieved September 25, 2024.
 "Michael Jackson's Moonwalker at 25". Clash. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "Entertainment Notes: Moonwalker Tops Thriller". Deseret News. February 6, 1989. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "Gold & Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson's Neverland on sale". The Times. Reuters. June 1, 2015. Archived from the original on June 13, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson – Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 20, 2008.
 Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (August 1, 2014). "Michael Jackson Neverland Ranch expected to fetch up to $85m". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 14, 2023. Retrieved June 11, 2015.
 Mull, Marison (May 6, 1988). "Pepsi Ads to Run on Soviet TV". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Tannenbaum & Marks 2011, Chapter 41, "I Want to Have a Nickname".
 Browne, David (June 25, 2009). "Michael Jackson's Black or White". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Campbell 1993, pp. 260–263.
 "Remarks on the Upcoming Summit with President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union". The American Presidency Project. April 5, 1990. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Taylor Swift to receive first-ever Taylor Swift Award". WFTV. Cox Media Group National Content Desk. April 5, 2016. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2024.
 "Blacks Who Give Something Back". Ebony. Vol. 45, no. 3. March 1990. p. 68. ISSN 0012-9011. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved January 9, 2016.
 Taraborrelli 2009, p. 382.
 "Garth Brooks ropes in most Billboard awards". The Beaver County Times. Associated Press. December 10, 1992. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2010.
 Montgomery, James (July 6, 2009). "Michael Jackson's Life & Legacy: The Eccentric King Of Pop (1986–1999)". MTV. Archived from the original on October 24, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2022.
 Gray, Chris; Shah, Saeed (October 3, 2002). "Robbie swings historic record deal with EMI". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Willman, Chris (November 24, 1991). "Michael Jackson's 'Dangerous'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2019. Retrieved June 11, 2015.
 "Gold & Platinum Searchable Database – Jackson, Michael". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson's best selling studio albums". The Daily Telegraph. June 26, 2009. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved September 20, 2021.
 "The return of the King of Pop". Today. November 2, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson Chart History". Billboard. September 12, 2008. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved November 29, 2021.
 "Jackson Shows Up to Gather Awards, Despite Ankle Injury". Los Angeles Times. March 11, 1993. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on June 17, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2019.
 "MJ's 'Dangerous' World Tour Raised Millions To Aid Children & Environment". Michael Jackson Official Site. Retrieved August 14, 2024.
 Harrington, Richard (February 5, 1992). "Jackson to Tour Overseas". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015.
 Zad, Martie (October 4, 1992). "Michael Jackson Concert from Bucharest on HBO Saturday". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 452–454.
 "Stars line up for Clinton celebration". Los Angeles Daily News. January 19, 1993.
 Smith, Patricia (January 20, 1992). "Facing the music and the masses at the presidential gala". The Boston Globe.
 Stuart, Tessa; Spanos, Brittany; Grow, Kory (January 19, 2017). "From Dylan to Beyonce: Most Legendary Inauguration Performances". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson: Crowned in Africa, Pop Music King Tells Real Story Of Controversial Trip". Ebony. Vol. 47, no. 5. May 1992. pp. 34–43. ISSN 0012-9011.
 Hugeux, Vincent (September 3, 2009). "Michael Jackson l'Africain". L'Express (in French). Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2021.
 "Hommage à Michael Jackson: deux ans déjà" (in French). China Internet Information Center. June 25, 2011. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2021.
 "Michael Jackson: The Thrill Of Thriller". BBC World Service. Archived from the original on February 18, 2018. Retrieved January 1, 2024.
 Sandomir, Richard (June 29, 2009). "How Jackson Redefined the Super Bowl". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 29, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2013.
 Rosenthal, Phil (February 6, 2011). "Goal of spectacle colors NFL's thinking about Super Bowl halftime show". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Andrews, Travis M. (February 2, 2018). "From Elvis Presto to Michael Jackson: How the Super Bowl halftime show found its groove". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 15, 2024.
 Margulies, Lee (February 12, 1993). "Jackson Interview Seen by 90 Million, ABC Says". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 14, 2024.
 "Cyrus, Bolton please the fans". Toledo Blade. Associated Press. January 27, 1993. Archived from the original on March 3, 2023. Retrieved March 3, 2023.
 Rosen, Craig (February 6, 1993). "Michael Jackson Cops 3 Top Prizes". Billboard. Vol. 105, no. 6. p. 12. ISSN 0006-2510.
 McShane, Larry (February 25, 1983). "Grammy moments – memorable and forgettable". Deseret News. p. C3. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 496–498.
 Philips, Chuck; Ferrell, David (August 31, 1993). "Tapes Used to Allege Plot to Extort Jackson Released : Inquiry: Singer's aides provide purported comments by boy's father, who has told friends allegations are untrue". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 25, 2025. Retrieved February 26, 2025.
 Sullivan 2012, pp. 256–257
 Sullivan 2012, p. 254–255
 Sullivan 2012, p. 258
 Sullivan 2012, p. 261
 Sullivan 2012, p. 259
 "Jackson reps claim tape supports singer". Variety. Associated Press. September 2, 1993. Archived from the original on February 25, 2025. Retrieved February 26, 2025.
 Campbell 1994, p. 47–49
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 534–540.
 Campbell 1995, pp. 28–29.
 Newton, Jim; Nazario, Sonia (August 27, 1993). "Police Say Seized Tapes Do Not Incriminate Jackson : Investigation: Officials continue to interview children in connection with molestation allegations". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 25, 2025. Retrieved February 26, 2025.
 Jackson, Michael; Presley, Lisa Marie (June 19, 1995). "Interview". ABC Primetime (Interview). Interviewed by Diane Sawyer.
 Broder, John M. (April 30, 2005). "Jackson's Books About Boys Are Allowed as Evidence in Trial". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Photos May Contradict Michael's Accuser". USA Today. May 2, 1994. Archived from the original on April 28, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2019.
 Halperin, Ian (2009). Unmasked: The Final Years of Michael Jackson. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4391-7719-8. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 Ebert, John David (2010). Dead Celebrities, Living Icons: Tragedy and Fame in the Age of the Multimedia Superstar. Praeger. p. 201. ISBN 978-0-313-37764-8. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson Paid $15.3 M to Boy in '90s - ABC News". ABC News. February 25, 2025. Archived from the original on February 25, 2025. Retrieved May 3, 2025. Jackson agreed to set up a trust fund of $15,331,250 for the boy, Court TV reported, citing the document. The singer also agreed to pay $1.5 million to each of the boy's parents. (18.3 Million total paid to the Chandler family)
 Weinraub, Bernard (January 26, 1994). "Michael Jackson Settles Suit For Sum Said to Be in Millions". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on February 9, 2025. Retrieved February 26, 2025.
 Steinhaus, Rochelle (June 16, 2004). "Jackson settlement from 1993 allegations topped $20 million". CNN. Archived from the original on September 15, 2020. Retrieved April 15, 2021.
 "Jackson's 'past' allowed in court". BBC News. March 29, 2005. Archived from the original on February 24, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Weinraub, Bernard (January 26, 1994). "Michael Jackson Settles Suit For Sum Said to Be in Millions". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 3, 2025.
 Meyer, Josh (July 7, 1994). "Jackson and Arson Cases in Limbo : Investigations: Grand jury disbanded without bringing indictments against either the pop superstar or two firefighters suspected of setting Calabasas/Malibu blaze. Lawyers urge resolution of both issues". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 3, 2025.
 Spolar, Christine; Wexler, Kathryn (September 22, 1994). "JACKSON CASE DROPPED". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved May 3, 2025. 430 witnesses had been interviewed in both counties and several leads were explored "which later turned out to be false.
 "Warrant Allows a Strip Search of Jackson". Deseret News. Associated Press. November 16, 1993. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Philips, Chuck; Newton, Jim (November 13, 1993). "Jackson Ends World Tour, Cites Painkiller Addiction". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 518–520.
 Fenton, Matthew McCann (May 30, 2001). "Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley wed". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 "She's out of his life" (Press release). CNN. January 18, 1996. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 580–581.
 Schodolski, Vincent J. (January 19, 1996). "After 20 Months, Jackson and Presley Agree to Divorce". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 "Lisa Marie Presley Opens Up About Michael Jackson". January 20, 2011. Archived from the original on January 20, 2011. Retrieved May 19, 2022.
 Horowitz, Ken (May 19, 2009). "Sega Legends: Michael Jackson & Sonic 3". Sega-16. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved March 13, 2021.
 Nightingale, Ed (June 23, 2022). "Yuji Naka confirms Michael Jackson wrote music for Sonic 3". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved June 23, 2022.
 Szczepaniak, John (2018). The Untold History of Japanese Game Developers: Volume 3. S.M.G Szczepaniak. p. 292. ISBN 978-0-9929260-8-3.
 Carless, Simon (March 27, 2006). "Michael Jackson's Secret Sonic 3 Shame". GameSetWatch. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved March 13, 2021.
 Van Luling, Todd (January 25, 2016). "The Michael Jackson Video Game Conspiracy". HuffPost. Archived from the original on March 14, 2021. Retrieved March 13, 2021.
 Montgomery, James (December 4, 2009). "Did Michael Jackson Compose 'Sonic The Hedgehog 3' Soundtrack?". MTV.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2009. Retrieved December 5, 2009.
 "Top 100 Albums". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on September 13, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson's best selling studio albums". The Daily Telegraph. June 26, 2009. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved June 11, 2015.
 Pareles, Jon (June 18, 1995). "Pop View; Michael Jackson Is Angry, Understand?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "News – Jackson receives his World Records". Yahoo! News. November 14, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011.
 Harrington, Richard (June 23, 1995). "Michael Jackson changes his tune on lyrics". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2023.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 576–577.
 "Company News; Michael Jackson sells rights to Beatles songs to Sony". The New York Times. Associated Press. November 8, 1995. Archived from the original on May 26, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Leeds, Jeff; Sorkin, Andrew Ross (April 13, 2006). "Michael Jackson Bailout Said to Be Close". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2011. Retrieved July 23, 2008.
 Myers, Justin (December 14, 2018). "The best-selling singles of all time on the Official UK Chart". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2019.
 McKie, John (February 21, 1996). "Brits brawl as Cocker 'pulps' Jackson chorus". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2019.
 "Brit Awards: Brits behaving badly". BBC News. March 4, 2000. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2019.
 Christensen, Thor (January 30, 1996). "Brooks turns down award for favorite artist of the year". Rome News-Tribune. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2010.
 "60,000 Attend Free Michael Jackson Concert". Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023.
 Hall, James (January 24, 2023). "Inside the Middle East's private gig gravy train for musicians, from Beyoncé to Michael Jackson". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 570–586.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 580–581, 597.
 "Debbie Rowe, Michael Jackson's ex-wife and kids' mom, to testify". Los Angeles Times. August 14, 2013. Archived from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 10, 2022.
 "Jackson child custody fight ends". BBC News. September 30, 2006. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Rojek 2007, p. 74.
 Burkeman, Oliver (July 7, 2002). "Jacko gets tough: but is he a race crusader or just a falling star?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Ricky Martin, Mariah Carey, Michael Jackson, Others to Join Pavarotti for Benefit". VH1. May 5, 1999. Archived from the original on October 18, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Slash, Scorpions, Others Scheduled for "Michael Jackson & Friends"". VH1. May 27, 1999. Archived from the original on February 21, 2010. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Fisher, Mark (2009). The Resistible Demise of Michael Jackson. John Hunt Publishing. p. 154. ISBN 978-1-84694-348-5. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2023.
 Solihun, Soleh. The King is Dead. PT Mizan Publika. p. 157. ISBN 978-602-8579-13-1. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2023.
 Rozhon, Tracie (November 16, 2000). "Big Deal; An Old Chagall Haunt, Repainted". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Basham, David (January 18, 2000). "Lauryn Hill, Backstreet Boys, DMX Honored With American Music Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on September 25, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson's Thriller 25 to rock the planet". China Internet Information Center. February 8, 2008. Retrieved October 19, 2021.
 Orth, Maureen (April 2003). "Losing His Grip". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on March 6, 2008.
 Aiese, Eric. "Billboard: Michael Jackson Concert Review". Classic Whitney. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved April 7, 2019.
 "Jackson's CBS Special Moonwalks Over Rivals". Billboard. November 15, 2001. Retrieved August 14, 2024.
 "Was Michael Jackson almost in WTC on 9/11?". Today. September 14, 2011. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved May 11, 2018.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 614–617.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 610–611.
 Leonard, Devin (January 2, 2017). "Michael Jackson Is Worth More Than Ever, and the IRS Wants Its Cut" (Press release). Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on February 8, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021.
 Marikar, Sheila; Friedman, Emily (June 29, 2009). "Michael Jackson, King of Pop, Dead at 50". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021.
 "Keys, Destiny's Child, McGraw win at American Music Awards". Lodi News-Sentinel. Associated Press. January 10, 2002. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2010.
 Chonin, Neva (January 11, 2002). "Awards recognize popular success / Keys, Destiny's win as expected". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2019.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 599–600.
 Vineyard, Jennifer (November 20, 2002). "Michael Jackson Calls Baby-Dangling Incident A 'Terrible Mistake'". MTV. Archived from the original on November 20, 2010. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 D'Angelo, Joe (February 4, 2002). "Jackson sued by promoter for attempting world tour without him". MTV. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2019.
 Overend, William (March 21, 2003). "Officials Revisit Tax Break for Jackson's Neverland as Cattle Ranch". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2019.
 "Jackson's Legal Troubles". The Wall Street Journal. June 13, 2005. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2019.
 Silverman, Stephen M. (May 10, 2004). "Jackson Settles Old Lawsuit Against Him". People. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2019.
 "Jackson fans celebrate at Apollo". BBC News. July 1, 2009. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020.
 Haughney, Christine (April 25, 2002). "For the DNC, It's Showtime at the Apollo". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020.
 Wheeler, André (November 2, 2019). "HBO's The Apollo: 'The story of how black America lifted itself through music'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020.
 "Michael Jackson Brands Recording Industry as Racist". Billboard. July 8, 2002. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Jackson, Jermaine (December 31, 2002). "Interview with Jermaine Jackson". Connie Chung Tonight (Interview). Interviewed by Connie Chung. CNN. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved July 2, 2008.
 Taraborrelli 2009, p. 640.
 Davies, Hugh (February 4, 2003). "Jackson has children in his room for 'sleep-overs'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Living with Michael Jackson (television). ITV. February 6, 2003. Event occurs at 0:51. Who's the criminal? Who's the jack-the-ripper in the room?... I'm sleeping on a sleeping bag on the floor. I give him the bed, 'cause he has a brother named Star. So him and Star took the bed. And I'm on the floor on the sleeping bag.
 Levitan, Corey (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson's relationship with Las Vegas started at young age". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2022.
 "Michael Jackson – Number Ones". British Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved August 29, 2021.
 Broder, John M. (December 19, 2003). "Jackson Is Formally Charged with Child Molesting". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Madigan, Nick; Neilan, Terence (January 16, 2004). "Michael Jackson Pleads Not Guilty to Molestation Charges". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Davis, Matthews (June 6, 2005). "Trial health problems for Jackson". BBC News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jackson cleared of child molestation". The Guardian. Associated Press. June 13, 2005. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Associated Press (December 23, 2009). "Michael Jackson's FBI Files Released". Billboard. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021.
 Vogel, Joe (January 29, 2019). "What You Should Know About the New Michael Jackson Documentary". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 15, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2021.
 "Michael Jackson: The fantastic possessions revealed". The Independent. Reuters. June 26, 2009. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Bishara, Motez (October 4, 2021). "'We wanted to make history': Michael Jackson's bizarre year in Bahrain". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved January 20, 2023.
 "Michael Jackson Sails with Two Seas". Billboard. April 18, 2006. Archived from the original on June 6, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jackson parts with Bahrain label". BBC News. September 26, 2006. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jackson strikes deal over loans". BBC News. April 14, 2006. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jackson Closes Neverland House". CBS News. July 6, 2009. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Blistein, Jon. "Michael Jackson's Neverland Ranch Devalued in Real Estate Market". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018.
 Bainbridge, Luke (August 14, 2010). "Michael Jackson's Irish hideaway". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 21, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2023.
 "2006 World Music Awards". Chiff. Archived from the original on February 4, 2008.
 Reid, Shaheem (December 30, 2006). "James Brown Saluted by Michael Jackson at Public Funeral Service". MTV. Archived from the original on April 26, 2010. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "The Police Plan MTV Unplugged Performance, Michael Jackson Buys Rights to Eminem Tunes, and More". Rolling Stone. May 31, 2007. Archived from the original on June 2, 2007.
 RedOne (March 23, 2009). "Interview with RedOne, producer and songwriter for Lady Gaga, Michael Jackson, Akon, Kat DeLuna and Darin" (Interview). Interviewed by Jan Blumentrath. HitQuarters. Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Talmadge, Eric (March 8, 2007). "Michael Jackson 'wouldn't change' career". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson Greets Troops in Japan". CBS News. March 10, 2007. Archived from the original on February 24, 2019. Retrieved February 25, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson wows US troops during lavish Japan stint". ABC News. March 11, 2007. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved February 25, 2019.
 Goodman, Elizabeth (September 24, 2007). "Will.i.am on Working with Michael Jackson". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 Friedman, Roger (May 16, 2008). "Jacko: Neverland East in Upstate New York". Fox News. Archived from the original on May 19, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2008.
 "Choose the Tracks on Michael Jackson's 50th Birthday Album!". Sony BMG. June 20, 2008. Archived from the original on June 28, 2008.
 "Neverland escapes foreclosure hook". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. May 12, 2008. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 "Neverland peters out for pop's Peter Pan". The Sydney Morning Herald. Press Association. November 13, 2008. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Topping, Alexandra (April 15, 2009). "Michael Jackson memorabilia sale cancelled". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved January 20, 2023.
 Adams, Guy (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson: The final decline of a pop legend". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.
 Foster, Patrick (March 6, 2009). "Michael Jackson grand finale curtain-raiser". The Times. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011.
 Kreps, Daniel (March 12, 2009). "Michael Jackson's "This Is It!" Tour Balloons to 50-Show Run Stretching Into 2010". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 "Michael Jackson: The Last Rehearsal". Life. June 29, 2009. Archived from the original on July 4, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Gottlieb, Jeff (August 12, 2013). "Michael Jackson trial: Pop star was 'tapped out,' millions in debt". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley. "Michael Jackson's Personal Debts Paid Off, Just In Time For Bad 25". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023.
 "Michael Jackson dead at 50 after cardiac arrest" (Press release). CNN. June 25, 2009. Archived from the original on August 27, 2009. Retrieved August 31, 2009.
 Duke, Alan (February 10, 2010). "Coroner releases new details about Michael Jackson's death" (Press release). CNN. Archived from the original on March 15, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019.
 Rayner, Gordon and Singh, Anita. Michael Jackson: the final days and how TMZ.com scooped the world Archived July 10, 2022, at the Wayback Machine, The Daily Telegraph, June 26, 2009.
 "Michael Jackson's life cut shockingly short". Associated Press. June 26, 2009. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2022.
 Whitcraft, Teri; Pisarcik, Kristin; Brown, Kimberly (June 23, 2010). "Timeline: Michael Jackson's Final Days". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 23, 2022. Retrieved March 19, 2017.
 Harvey, Michael (June 26, 2009). "Fans mourn artist for whom it didn't matter if you were black or white". The Times. Archived from the original on September 20, 2011.
 Moore, Matthew (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson, King of Pop, dies of cardiac arrest in Los Angeles". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022.
 Whitcomb, Dan; Isensee, Laura (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson death still unsolved after autopsy". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Doheny, Kathleen (August 24, 2009). "Propofol Linked to Michael Jackson's Death". WebMD. Archived from the original on August 24, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Rawlinson, Linnie; Hunt, Nick (June 26, 2009). "Jackson dies, almost takes Internet with him" (Press release). CNN. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2013.
 Wood, Daniel B. (June 27, 2009). "Outpouring over Michael Jackson unlike anything since Princess Di". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on August 13, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Shiels, Maggie (June 26, 2009). "Web slows after Jackson's death". BBC News. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Skok, David (June 26, 2009). "Internet stretched to limit as fans flock for Michael Jackson news". The Vancouver Sun. Archived from the original on July 3, 2009.
 Krazit, Tom; McCullagh, Declan (June 26, 2009). "Debate: Can the Internet handle big breaking news". CNET. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Dtelter, Brian (June 26, 2009). "MTV's Jackson Marathon". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jacko news spreads to Eastenders". Metro. June 26, 2009. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "More adds, loose ends, and lament". The 120 Minutes Archive. July 25, 2009. Archived from the original on May 14, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2014.
 "Over 1.6M apply for Jackson memorial tickets" (Press release). Associated Press. July 4, 2009. Archived from the original on April 26, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson memorial draws crowds online" (Press release). CNN. July 8, 2009. Archived from the original on August 18, 2012. Retrieved June 11, 2012.
 Scott, Andrew (July 9, 2009). "Michael Jackson Memorial Earns 31 Million Viewers & More TV News". AOL TV. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Hazarika''s funeral creates world record". MSN. July 8, 2009. Archived from the original on August 7, 2014.
 Hanley, Paul (2014). Eleven. Friesen Press. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-4602-5047-1. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved July 23, 2021.
 Allen, Nick (July 7, 2009). "Michael Jackson memorial service: the biggest celebrity send-off of all time". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Potter, Andrew (July 7, 2009). "There was nothing strange about your daddy". Maclean's. Archived from the original on April 9, 2014. Retrieved March 16, 2013.
 Branigan, Tania (September 8, 2001). "Jackson spends £20m to be Invincible". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2016.
 "Top Moments: Michael Jackson Memorial". TV Guide. July 7, 2009. Archived from the original on July 11, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Rev Lucious Smith on conducting the memorial service for Michael Jackson". Radio Live. June 28, 2010. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2013.
 Coleman, Mark (September 4, 2009). "Michael Jackson finally laid to rest in Los Angeles". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Reid, Tim (August 25, 2009). "LA coroner to treat Michael Jackson's death as a homicide". The Times. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved February 24, 2022.
 "Jackson 'had lethal drug levels'". BBC News. August 25, 2009. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson's doctor denies manslaughter charge". BBC News. February 9, 2010. Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Conrad Murray guilty of Michael Jackson manslaughter". BBC News. November 8, 2011. Archived from the original on January 25, 2019. Retrieved January 24, 2019.
 Leonard, Jack; Blankstein, Andrew; Winton, Richard (November 8, 2011). "Conrad Murray could face significant prison time". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 25, 2019. Retrieved January 24, 2019.
 Kasindorf, Martin (November 29, 2011). "Conrad Murray sentenced to four years in Jackson death". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2019.
 Martens, Todd (October 13, 2009). "Taylor Swift, Michael Jackson dominate American Music Awards nominations [Updated]". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "2009 American Music Awards: Scorecard". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. November 22, 2009. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Anderson, Trevor (June 25, 2019). "Michael Jackson's Posthumous Career: 10 Numbers That Tell The Tale". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2021.
 "Jackson sells 35 million albums since death". Today. Archived from the original on April 26, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Van Buskirk, Eliot (July 1, 2009). "Michael Jackson First Artist to Sell Over 1 Million Downloads in a Single Week". Wired. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Caulfield, Keith (January 6, 2010). "Taylor Swift Edges Susan Boyle for 2009's Top-Selling Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 27, 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "The late Michael Jackson a billion-dollar man". Today. June 21, 2010. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved August 15, 2024.
 Peters, Mitchell (November 8, 2013). "Michael Jackson's Touring Life After Death: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Retrieved August 25, 2024. 50 million albums sold worldwide after his death
 Smith, Ethan (March 16, 2010). "Sony Places Big Bet on a Fallen 'King'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson in 'record' $200m music deal". BBC. March 16, 2010. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Kreps, Daniel (March 16, 2010). "Michael Jackson Estate, Sony Strike Massive $250 Million Deal to Release King of Pop's Music". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 Christman, Ed (December 14, 2017). "Michael Jackson Estate, Sony Music Extend Partnership for Recordings". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2019.
 Christman, Ed (July 31, 2018). "Sony Completes Acquisition of Michael Jackson Estate's Share of EMI Music Publishing". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 31, 2018. Retrieved August 1, 2018.
 Trust, Gary (May 21, 2014). "Michael Jackson, Coldplay Hit Hot 100's Top 10; John Legend Still No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 8, 2020. Retrieved May 23, 2014.
 "Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' First Ever 30X Multi-Platinum RIAA Certification". Recording Industry Association of America. December 16, 2015. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2021.
 McIntyre, Hugh (February 16, 2017). "Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' Has Now Been Certified 33-Times Platinum". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017.
 Daly, Rhian (August 20, 2018). "Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' is no longer the best-selling album of all time in the US". NME. Archived from the original on September 23, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2019.
 Christman, Ed (February 9, 2024). "Sony Music Buys Stake in Michael Jackson Catalog, Valuing Rights at Over $1.2B". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024.
 Sisario, Ben (February 9, 2024). "Sony Reaches Blockbuster Deal for Michael Jackson's Catalog". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 11, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024.
 Bain, Katie; Donahue, Bill (December 8, 2023). "Michael Jackson Estate Says Digital Sale Of Early Jackson Recording Violates Estate Rights". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2023.
 Goodman, Dean (October 13, 2009). "'New' Michael Jackson Single Written in 1983". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2019.
 Eng, Joyce (August 10, 2009). "Judge Approves Michael Jackson Film". TV Guide. Archived from the original on October 2, 2018. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Herrera, Monica (September 23, 2009). "New Michael Jackson Song, Album Due in October". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 4, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson's This Is It". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Judge OKs Jackson performance film deal" (Press release). Associated Press. August 10, 2010. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Exclusive: Will.i.am Explains His 'Disgust' for New Michael Jackson Album". Rolling Stone. December 13, 2010. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved March 23, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson Fans Will Moonwalk in Motion-Sensing Game". Billboard. Associated Press. June 15, 2010.
 "Michael Jackson Fulham FC statue defended by Al Fayed". BBC News. April 3, 2011. Archived from the original on December 11, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson statue moves to National Football Museum". BBC News. May 6, 2014. Archived from the original on December 10, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016.
 "Michael Jackson statue: National Football Museum removes artwork". BBC News. March 6, 2019. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2019.
 "Cirque plans $57M touring Jackson show". CBC News. November 3, 2010. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Hicks, Tony (November 3, 2010). "People: Cirque du Soleil mounting Michael Jackson tour". Mercury News. Archived from the original on October 6, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2010.
 Jones, Chris (July 13, 2013). "'Michael Jackson One' in Las Vegas: Cirque du Soleil refinds its way". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on September 30, 2018. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (February 2, 2013). "Michael Jackson's New Vegas Show 'One' Will Double The Fun". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jermaine calls for an end to Jackson family feud". BBC News. August 2, 2012. Archived from the original on October 27, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson nephew made co-guardian of children". BBC News. August 23, 2012. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "New Michael Jackson album to be released in May". BBC News. March 31, 2014. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Trust, Gary (May 21, 2014). "Michael Jackson, Coldplay Hit Hot 100's Top 10; John Legend Still No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2020.
 Leight, Elias (September 6, 2017). "Michael Jackson's Estate Details 'Scream' Compilation". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 6, 2017. Retrieved September 29, 2017.
 BWW News Desk (October 9, 2020). "MJ the Musical on Broadway Postponed to September 2021". BroadwayWorld. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved April 4, 2021.
 "Tony awards 2022: the full list of winners". The Guardian. June 13, 2022. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved June 22, 2022.
 Gail Mitchell (May 16, 2022). "Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' Celebrates 40th Anniversary With Double-CD Set". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 22, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2022.
 "Thriller 40 – A Double CD Set Of Michael Jackson's Original Masterpiece Thriller & Bonus Disc Out Now". Legacy Recordings. November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Immersive audio mixes of Thriller are now available at various DSPs, including 360 Reality Audio on Amazon, Spatial Audio on Apple Music, mixed by Serban Ghenea from the original masters for immersive audio, with the immersive mixes by John Hanes.
 France, Lisa Respers (January 27, 2025). "'Michael' movie: Why the Michael Jackson biopic may require reshoots". CNN. Retrieved February 3, 2025.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (January 30, 2023). "Michael Jackson Nephew Jaafar Jackson To Play King Of Pop In Antoine Fuqua-Directed Biopic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 24, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023.
 Brown, Stacy M. (September 9, 2024). "John Branca's Masterstroke: How Michael Jackson's Estate Surged Passed $2 Billion in Ticket Sales". The Times Weekly. Retrieved October 1, 2024.
 "Choreographer: Michael Jackson 'sexually abused me'". Today. May 16, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2017.
 Menezes, Alroy (August 6, 2014). "James Safechuck Alleges Sexual Abuse By Michael Jackson, Sues Singer's Estate". International Business Times. Retrieved May 30, 2019.
 Stone, Ken (July 7, 2017). "Sex abuse by long-dead Michael Jackson? Judge rejects lawsuit". MyNewsLA.com. Retrieved March 15, 2019.
 Selby, Jenn (August 6, 2014). "Michael Jackson hit with new child sex abuse claims more than five years after his death". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved March 15, 2019.
 Broder, John M. (May 6, 2005). "2 Witnesses Say They Shared Jackson's Bed and Were Never Molested". The New York Times. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Sperling, Nicole (February 21, 2019). "'Michael Is Everywhere': Two Michael Jackson Accusers Explain Why They're Speaking Out in HBO's Leaving Neverland". Vanity Fair. Retrieved March 15, 2019.
 "Safechuck Ruling Demurrer Dismissal". June 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2019 – via Scribd.
 Dalton, Andrew (December 20, 2017). "APNewsBreak: Michael Jackson Sex Abuse Lawsuit Dismissed" (Press release). Associated Press. Retrieved December 21, 2017.
 "Michael Jackson sex abuse lawsuit dismissed". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. December 19, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017.
 Mandel, Andrea (October 21, 2020). "'Leaving Neverland' accuser James Safechuck's lawsuit against Michael Jackson's companies dismissed". USA Today. Retrieved January 13, 2022.
 "Lawsuit of Michael Jackson sexual abuse accuser dismissed". Associated Press. October 23, 2020. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2020.
 Feldman, Kate (October 21, 2020). "Michael Jackson estate tries to block documentarian from filming 'Leaving Neverland' sequel: report". New York Daily News. New York. Retrieved October 31, 2020.
 Kanter, Jake (October 21, 2020). "'Leaving Neverland' Director Dan Reed Fights Subpoenas as He Shoots Sequel to Channel 4/HBO's Michael Jackson Film". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 31, 2020.
 Dalton, Andrew (April 27, 2021). "Judge tosses lawsuit of man who alleged Jackson molestation". ABC News. Associated Press. Retrieved April 28, 2021.
 Haynes, Charlie (February 28, 2019). "Michael Jackson 'abused us hundreds of times'". BBC News. Retrieved March 8, 2019.
 Bakare, Lanre (March 7, 2019). "Michael Jackson estate launches PR blitz as documentary airs in UK". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2019.
 Roy, Eleanor Ainge (March 6, 2019). "Michael Jackson songs pulled from radio stations in New Zealand and Canada". The Guardian. Retrieved March 8, 2019.
 Pieters, Janene (March 6, 2019). "First Dutch radio station boycotts Michael Jackson music". NL Times. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson's Family Calls 'Leaving Neverland' Documentary a 'Public Lynching'". Variety. January 28, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2019.
 Kreps, Daniel (January 26, 2019). "Michael Jackson Estate Slams 'Leaving Neverland': 'Tabloid Character Assassination'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 "Corey Feldman Guards Michael Jackson After 'Leaving Neverland' Airs". Vibe. March 4, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2019.
 McDermott, Maeve (May 22, 2019). "Aaron Carter defends Michael Jackson after saying the star did one 'inappropriate' thing". USA Today. Retrieved September 21, 2019.
 "Leaving Neverland: who is Brett Barnes, Michael Jackson's 'other boy'?". The Daily Telegraph. March 8, 2019. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2019.
 "'Square One', el documental que "desmonta" las acusaciones de pederastia sobre Michael Jackson" (in Spanish). October 16, 2019.
 Wallis, Adam (April 8, 2019). "Jackson family responds to 'Leaving Neverland' in 30-minute YouTube documentary". Global News. Retrieved October 31, 2020.
 Trendell, Andrew (August 15, 2019). "New documentary 'Chase the Truth' defending Michael Jackson is released". NME. Retrieved October 31, 2020.
 Shepherd, Jack (March 9, 2019). "Michael Jackson albums climb the charts following Leaving Neverland broadcast". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Landrum, Jonathan Jr. (June 24, 2019). "Michael Jackson's popularity endures, even after new scandal". The Japan Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019.
 Ramsey, Teresa (November 14, 2019). "Michael Jackson songs back on New Zealand radio airwaves". Stuff. Retrieved November 29, 2019.
 Lemieux, Marc-André (October 29, 2019). "Fin du boycottage de Michael Jackson". Le Journal de Montréal (in French). Retrieved December 30, 2019.
 Gardner, Eriq (February 21, 2019). "Michael Jackson Estate Sues HBO Over 'Leaving Neverland' Documentary". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 21, 2019.
 Rosenbaum, Claudia (September 20, 2019). "'Leaving Neverland' Judge Sides with Michael Jackson Estate, Compelling HBO to Arbitration". Billboard. Retrieved May 6, 2021.
 Cullins, Ashley (December 14, 2020). "HBO Loses Appellate Bid to Avoid Arbitration with Michael Jackson Estate in 'Leaving Neverland' Dispute". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 11, 2021.
 Kuo, Christopher (August 18, 2023). "Sexual Abuse Suits Against Michael Jackson's Companies Are Revived". The New York Times.
 Csongos, Frank T. "Michael Jackson draws a White House crowd". United Press International. Retrieved March 13, 2025.
 "ADL Welcomes Michael Jackson's Decision to Remove Anti-Semitic Lyrics from Song". Anti-Defamation League. June 22, 1995. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson's music had impact around the globe" (Press release). Reuters. July 4, 2009. Retrieved March 27, 2020.
 Vigilante, David (June 26, 2009). "Commentary: Jackson was the Jackie Robinson of MTV" (Press release). CNN. Retrieved July 4, 2020.
 Vogel, Joseph (March 17, 2018). "Black and White: how Dangerous kicked off Michael Jackson's race paradox". The Guardian. Retrieved January 13, 2020.
 "Why Michael Jackson's songs on climate change and racial inequality need to be youth anthems now". India Today. August 29, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2020.
 Dodson, Howard (July 7, 2009). "Michael Jackson: Icon". New York Public Library. Retrieved November 26, 2018.
 Fernandes, Kasmin (June 25, 2014). "Why Michael Jackson was a style icon". The Times of India. Retrieved March 11, 2016.
 Lemon, Don (June 23, 2010). "Michael Jackson's style influence lives on" (Press release). CNN. Retrieved March 11, 2016.
 Vena, Jocelyn (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson's Style Legacy, From Military Jackets to One Glove". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2016.
 Rosen, Jill (June 28, 2009). "7 Ways Michael Jackson Changed the World". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved April 24, 2016.
 "Michael Jackson's music had impact around the globe". Reuters. July 4, 2009. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2020.
 Johnson, Robert E. (May 1992). "Michael Jackson: Crowned in Africa, pop music king tells real story of controversial trip". Ebony. Vol. 47, no. 7. Johnson Publishing Company. pp. 34–36, 40, 42–43.
 Murphy, Tim (May 3, 1996). "NEWS FEATURE: In India, Gandhi is out, Michael Jackson is in". Religion News Service. Retrieved January 1, 2025.
 Michael Jackson outdraws the Pope. September 4, 1996. Michael Jackson is bigger than the Pope here, thousands of screeching fans welcomed the King of Pop at the Airport Tuesday as he arrived to kick off his History World Tour. The Crowd was far bigger than the one received by the Pope during his recent visit according to locals. {{cite book}}: |newspaper= ignored (help)
 Abbas, Nosheen (August 2, 2009). "Pakistan Mourns Michael Jackson". HuffPost. Retrieved December 30, 2024.
 Halperin, Shirley (December 31, 2012). "Psy on Pressure, the Universal Language of Michael Jackson and Ushering in 2013 'Gangnam Style' (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 1, 2025.
 "'Thriller 40' reveals Michael Jackson is the King of Pop for K-pop icons like BTS". The Times of India. December 3, 2023. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved January 1, 2025.
 Keyes, J. Edward (July 7, 2009). "Michael Jackson's, Indelible Pop Legacy". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 5, 2020.
 Smith, Danyel (June 26, 2009). "Commentary: Michael Jackson, the greatest star" (Press release). CNN. Retrieved July 4, 2020.
 "Michael Jackson". BET. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Utley, Tom (February 7, 2003). "Of course Jackson's odd—but his genius is what matters". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 26, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Gordy Brings Mourners to Their Feet with Jackson Tribute". July 7, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Tourtellotte, Bob (July 8, 2009). "Michael Jackson hailed as greatest entertainer, best dad" (Press release). Reuters UK. Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson Named Most Successful Entertainer Of All Time". CityNews. November 15, 2006. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Ditzian, Eric (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson's Groundbreaking Career, by the Numbers". MTV. Archived from the original on July 16, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2016.
 "100 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. December 3, 2010. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. January 1, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023.
 Glenday, Craig (2011). Guinness World Records 2011. Sterling Pub. ISBN 978-0-440-42310-2.
 Glenday, Craig (2013). Guinness World Records 2013. Random House. ISBN 978-0-345-54711-8. p. 408: The Five leading names are Jesus, Muhammad, Isaac Newton, Buddha and Confucius, clearly significant figures. However who among us could quote more lines from Confucius than a Michael Jackson song, the man Guinness named the most famous person on earth in 2006
 Sparber, Max (June 26, 2009). "Meeting a supernova". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved December 7, 2024.
 Ghazal, Rym. "'He meant so much to Arabs'". The National. Retrieved December 7, 2024. I don't think MJ knew just how much his music shaped a whole generation of Arabs, just how many fans he had here and just how devoted they remained throughout his ordeals. We might not have heard of the Beatles or Elvis Presley, but we sure knew Michael Jackson. There were fears among the religious police about his "influence" on the young mind, he was a symbol of America as a land of opportunity, especially for a generation of Arabs that had grown up in conflict. People named their cars after him, not to mention their pets - my own white-and-black cat is called MJ, I cannot think of another foreign artist who has infiltrated our culture so much as him.
 Grundey, Adam (June 29, 2019). "Wanted dead or alive: Despite 'Leaving Neverland,' Michael Jackson's star seems undiminished in the Middle East". Arab News. Retrieved December 7, 2024. As a performer and musician, Jackson was idolized around the world. He became an enormous part of people's lives — and arguably the most recognizable person in history, despite the surgery.
 Irish, John (September 21, 2016). "Ghana leader tells U.N. to dance to tune of Michael Jackson". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
 "Michael Jackson's music had impact around the globe". Reuters. November 29, 2016. Archived from the original on November 29, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2024.
 "We live in Michael Jackson's world: SRK". The Times of India. August 20, 2009. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved May 23, 2024.
 Gardner, Dinah (October 28, 2009). "Why the Chinese are obsessed with the late Michael Jackson". MinnPost. Retrieved December 7, 2024.
 "Ethiopian envoy confers with UNESCO Peace Medal winner "MJ Resurrector" of China". Fana Broadcasting Corporate. November 18, 2024. Retrieved December 8, 2024. The world's most Michael Jackson-like Chinese "MJ Resurrector", winner of the UNESCO Peace Medal
 Montenegro, Manuel (December 7, 2016). "See The Reaction Of An Amazon Tribe To Modern War Footage, The Moon Landing And More". KAMI. Retrieved December 7, 2024. A French movie crew visited a remote tribe in the Amazon rainforest to show them video clips encasing modern society
 "Michael Jackson continua vivo em São Tomé e Príncipe" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Universo Online. Retrieved July 25, 2024. The 'King of Pop' is still alive in a remote and unknown location on the planet: on the small African islands of São Tomé and Príncipe. Damião Mendes Marques is known only as 'Michael' and became a local celebrity. Always dressed as his idol, he attracts crowds with his performance and dreams one day of being able to meet the Jackson family.
 Kerr, Jim; Squibb, Shirley. "Tristen De Cunha Performing Arts Show". Tristan da Cunha Government. Retrieved December 7, 2024. The show started with a dance to Thriller, zombies appeared from all directions and danced with Nathan Swain, the island's Michael Jackson lookalike.
 Haider, Arwa (June 29, 2018). "The Complex and Celebrated Image of Michael Jackson". Elephant. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
 Stansfield, Ted (June 28, 2018). "How Michael Jackson Impacted the World of Art". Another Man. Retrieved November 8, 2024. Few have permeated the realm of art like Michael Jackson. Aside from Jesus Christ, there aren't many people who have inspired creative practitioners to the degree that the MJ has.
 Finch, Mariko (July 23, 2018). "Celebrating Michael Jackson at the National Portrait Gallery". Sotheby's. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
 Powell, Rose (June 10, 2014). "Wikipedia's most influential people: Carl Linnaeus, Jesus, Hitler, Michael Jackson". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
 Eom, Young-Ho; Shepelyansky, Dima L. (2013). "Highlighting entanglement of cultures via ranking of multilingual Wikipedia articles". PLOS ONE. 8 (10): e74554. arXiv:1306.6259. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...874554E. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0074554. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 3789750. PMID 24098338.
 Major Academic Fields influenced by Michael Jackson Economics, Zoology, Dermatology, Music, Kinesiology, Semiotics, Ethics, Anthropology, Medicine, Law, Criminology, Philosophy, Religious Studies, Cultural Psychology, Audiometry, Media, Accounting, Language, Neuropsychology, Psychology, Film Studies, Dance, Rhetoric, Cultural Studies, Linguistics, Humanism, Ethnology, Film Studies, Jewish Studies, Divinity, Peace and Conflict Studies, Environmental Studies, Communication Studies, Marketing, Theater, Visual Arts, Library Studies, Fashion, Political Science, Computer Science, Physics, Neuroscience, History, Forensic Science, Engineering, Geography, International Relations, Education, Complex Systems, African American Studies, Hermeneutics, Cross-Culture Communication, Race Studies, Pragmatics, Gender Studies, Biomechanics, Complex Systems, Critical Theory
 "Pop Culture Expert Can Speak About Michael Jackson's Academic Legacy". Texas Tech University. Retrieved March 10, 2025 – via Newswise. The list of scholarly papers and peer-reviewed articles, culled from more than 100 databases, found the King of Pop referenced in psychology, medical, chemistry, mass communications and even engineering journals.
 Stevens, Hampton (June 24, 2010). "Michael Jackson's Unparalleled Influence". The Atlantic. Retrieved March 10, 2025. Jackson was the single most influential artist of the 20th century
 Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (June 25, 2014). "Michael Jackson: Five years after his death, how his influence lives on". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved March 10, 2025. The panopticon of the internet means that today it should technically be easy to get as famous as Jackson – you can be adored from the Mongolian steppes to the Madagascan rainforest, all via YouTube. But in reality, fame is diluted by the internet as everyone makes their own collaged personal vision of global culture, and so that Jackson-level fame, an omnipresence mediated via the restricted channels of radio, TV and recorded sound, is unlikely ever to be repeated.
 Daunt, Tina (July 8, 2009). "Giving in spirit and deed". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 1, 2025.
 Jackson-Lee, Sheila (June 26, 2009). "H. RES. 600: Honoring an American legend and musical icon".
 Brad Cafarelli, "Superstar's musical career had the classic humble start", Los Angeles Times (November 7, 1988), Section VIII, p. 1, 5.
 Vogel, Joseph (September 24, 2017). "Michael Jackson's Forgotten Humanitarian Legacy". HuffPost. Retrieved January 1, 2025.
 Wilhelm, Ian (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson and Philanthropy". The Chronicle of Philanthropy.
 "Jackson's foundation now virtually defunct". Today. March 25, 2004. Retrieved November 10, 2023.
 "Songs Of Tears, Hope And Defiance". CBS News. October 21, 2001. Retrieved February 4, 2025.
 Halstead, Craig; Cadman, Chris (2003). Michael Jackson the Solo Years. Authors Online. p. 79. ISBN 9780755200917.
 Zafar, Aylin (October 6, 2011). "Court Recording: Michael Jackson Dreamed of Building a Children's Hospital". Time. Retrieved February 4, 2025.
 "He won't stop 'til they get enough". The Daily Telegraph. January 1, 2001.
 "Most charities supported by a pop star". Guinness World Records. 2000.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 304–307.
 "Drunk Driving Prevention (1983–Present)". Advertising Education Foundation. 2003. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "What actually is perfect pitch – and how do I get it?". Classic FM. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 28, 2020.
 Brown, Geoff (1996). The complete guide to the music of Michael Jackson and The Jackson family. London: Omnibus Press. p. 164. ISBN 978-0-7119-5303-1.
 Jones, Lucy (August 29, 2018). "The Incredible Way Michael Jackson Wrote Music". NME. Retrieved November 30, 2024.
 Hoffman, Claire (August 6, 2009). "The Last Days of Michael Jackson". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 30, 2024.
 Light, Alan (January 1, 1992). "Michael Jackson's 'Dangerous'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 30, 2024.
 Stone, Rolling (June 23, 2014). "50 Best Michael Jackson Songs". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 30, 2024.
 Stegner-Petitjean, Isabelle (December 15, 2011). "'The Voice in the Mirror'. Michael Jackson: From a Vocal Identity to its Double in Sound". Volume! La revue des musiques populaires. 8 : 2 (8 : 2): 222–253. doi:10.4000/volume.3851. ISSN 1634-5495.
 Swedien, Bruce; Jackson, Michael (2009). In the studio with Michael Jackson. New York: Hal Leonard Books. pp. 8–10, 119–126. ISBN 978-1-4234-6495-2. OCLC 316825874.
 Lopez, Rich (November 26, 2023). "Review: Simply said, 'MJ' was a thriller". Dallas Voice. Retrieved November 30, 2024.
 Ewing, Tom (June 10, 2011). "Michael Jackson starts work on Off the Wall". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved November 30, 2024.
 "Apple Music: Michael Jackson Love Songs". Apple Music. Retrieved November 30, 2024.
 Brackett & Hoard 2004, p. 414.
 Holden, Stephen (November 1, 1979). "Michael Jackson: Off The Wall". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 Connelly, Christopher (January 28, 1983). "Michael Jackson: Thriller". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 Pareles, Jon (November 24, 1991). "Recordings View; Michael Jackson in the Electronic Wilderness". The New York Times. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Hunter, James (December 6, 2001). "Michael Jackson: Invincible". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 1, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 Vogel 2012, p. 9.
 McCormick, Neil (June 30, 2009). "Michael Jackson, Bruce Springsteen & Bono". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 3, 2009. Retrieved February 16, 2016.
 Tucker, Ken (June 5, 1988). "Summer Reading; Firing Your Father Isn't Easy". The New York Times. p. 751. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "100 Greatest Singers: 65 – David Ruffin". Rolling Stone. November 27, 2008. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Herron, Martin (June 27, 2009). "Michael Jackson saved my life". Scarborough Evening News. Archived from the original on June 28, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Jackson Attends Brown's Public Funeral". Contactmusic.com. January 2, 2007. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Taraborrelli 2009, p. 64.
 Simon, Mallory (July 3, 2009). "Jackson shared bond with 'very dear friend Diana Ross'" (Press release). CNN. Retrieved December 1, 2016.
 Taraborrelli 2009, p. 60.
 Lewis Jones 2005, pp. 6, 54.
 Winters, David (June 26, 2009). "David Winters remembers Michael Jackson". Magick Papers. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015.
 Hernandez, Eugene (June 27, 2009). "Remembering Michael Jackson, on Screen". IndieWire. Archived from the original on June 27, 2009.
 Jones, Lucy (April 2, 2014). "The Incredible Way Michael Jackson Wrote Music". NME. Retrieved April 26, 2016.
 Roy, Sanjoy (June 26, 2009). "What Michael Jackson did for dance". The Guardian. Retrieved February 18, 2020.
 "Rolling Stone Readers Pick Their 10 Favorite Dancing Musicians". Rolling Stone. July 14, 2011. Retrieved January 7, 2020.
 Suddath, Claire (June 25, 2009). "How to Moonwalk like Michael". Time. Archived from the original on May 15, 2011.
 Catton, Pia (June 20, 2018). "How Michael Jackson Changed Dance History". Biography. Retrieved February 18, 2020.
 Lehman 2008, p. 84.
 "Michael Jackson Turns 30!". Jet. Vol. 74, no. 35. August 29, 1988. p. 58. ISSN 0021-5996.
 Heyliger, M. "A State-of-the-Art Pop Album: Thriller by Michael". Consumerhelpweb.com. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. Not many artists could pull off such a variety of styles (funk, post-disco, rock, easy listening, ballads)...
 Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Michael Jackson – Off the Wall – Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
 Palmer 1995, p. 285.
 Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Michael Jackson – Thriller – Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Henderson, Eric (October 18, 2003). "Michael Jackson – Thriller". Slant Magazine. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Christgau 1981, Consumer Guide '70s: J.
 Pareles, Jon (September 3, 1987). "Critic's Notebook; How Good Is Jackson's 'Bad'?". The New York Times. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Michael Jackson – Dangerous – Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
 Harrington, Richard (November 24, 1991). "Jackson's 'Dangerous' Departures; Stylistic Shifts Mar His First Album in 4 Years". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012.
 Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Michael Jackson – HIStory – Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Hunter, James (August 10, 1995). "Michael Jackson: HIStory: Past, Present, Future, Book I". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
 "Thomas W. (Tom) Sneddon Jr". National Defense Authorization Act. Archived from the original on June 27, 2006. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Michael Jackson – Invincible – Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved September 9, 2007.
 Beaumont, Mark (November 30, 2001). "Michael Jackson: Invincible". NME. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Dobuzinskis, Alex (December 30, 2009). "Jackson "Thriller" film picked for U.S. registry" (Press release). Reuters. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Michael Jackson, "Billie Jean," directed by Steve Barron, produced by Simon Fields & Paul Flattery". Blender. October 2005.
 Gundersen, Edna (August 25, 2005). "Music videos changing places". USA Today. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Robinson, Bryan (February 23, 2005). "Why Are Michael Jackson's Fans So Devoted?". ABC News. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Inglis 2006, pp. 119, 127: "That Jackson lip-synced 'Billie Jean' is, in itself, not extraordinary, but the fact that it did not change the impact of the performance is extraordinary; whether the performance was live or lip-synced made no difference to the audience."
 "Philippine jailhouse rocks to Thriller". BBC News. July 26, 2007. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Taraborrelli 2009, pp. 370–373.
 Corliss, Richard (September 6, 1993). "Michael Jackson: Who's Bad?". Time. Retrieved April 23, 2008.
 US 5255452, Michael J. Jackson; Michael L. Bush & Dennis Tompkins, "Method and means for creating anti-gravity illusion", issued October 26, 1993
 Campbell 1993, p. 273.
 Anderson, Kyle (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson's Video Vanguard Award, in MJ's Top MTV Moments". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Campbell 1993, p. 303.
 "Michael Jackson Co-Directs Music Film, 'In the Closet'". Jet. April 27, 1992. p. 56.
 Campbell 1993, pp. 313–314.
 Boepple 1995, p. 52.
 Bark, Ed (June 26, 1995). "Michael Jackson Interview Raises Questions, Answers". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. p. 06E.
 McIntyre, Hugh (August 24, 2014). "The 5 Most Expensive Music Videos of All Time". Forbes. Retrieved March 23, 2019.
 Gottlieb, Steven (August 28, 2014). ""Scream" Gets Named Most Expensive Video Ever; Director Mark Romanek Disagrees". VideoStatic. Retrieved March 23, 2019.
 Kot, Greg (January 8, 1997). "Pumpkins a Smash Hit with 7 Grammy Nominations". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 King, Ashley (December 24, 2020). "Twenty One Pilots Wins Guinness World Record for Longest Music Video". Digital Music News. Retrieved February 3, 2025.
 Montgomery, James (June 26, 2009). "Michael Jackson's Video Co-Stars: From Eddie Murphy to Marlon Brando". MTV. Archived from the original on June 28, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2010.
 "NAACP Image Award Spotlight Black' Achievements". Jet. Vol. 101, no. 13. March 18, 2002. p. 36. ISSN 0021-5996.
 "Zorro, Nemo, Muppets & More: Wide Variety Tapped for 2009 Film Registry". Library of Congress. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Itzkoff, Dave (December 30, 2009). "'Thriller' Video Added to U.S. Film Registry". The New York Times. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Hinckley, David (June 25, 2014). "Michael Jackson remembered 5 years later: How the Daily News covered the tragic story of icon's death". New York Daily News. Retrieved September 9, 2015.
 Gold, Scott; Lee, Chris; Harriet, Ryan (June 26, 2009). "King of Pop is dead at 50". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 4, 2024. Sold more than half a billion copies.
 Frazza, Luke (June 25, 2024). "Il y a 15 ans, Michael Jackson nous quittait" (in Canadian French). Radio-Canada. Retrieved November 1, 2024. 500 millions - C'est le nombre de disques vendus dans le monde par Michael Jackson, qui se classe parmi les trois plus gros vendeurs [500 million - This is the number of records sold worldwide by Michael Jackson who ranks among the three best selling artists of all time]
 Wyman, Bill (January 4, 2013). "Did "Thriller" Really Sell a Hundred Million Copies". The New Yorker. Retrieved March 19, 2024.
 "Hot 100 Anniversary: Most No. 1s by Artist". Billboard. August 6, 2008. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Remarks at a White House Ceremony Marking Progress Made in the Campaign Against Drunk Driving". Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum. University of Texas at Austin. May 14, 1984. Archived from the original on May 24, 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2020.
 George 2004, pp. 44–45.
 Campbell 1993, p. 321.
 Lewis, Monica (June 14, 2007). "20 People Who Changed Black Music: Michael Jackson, the Child Star-Turned-Adult Enigma". The Miami Herald. Retrieved March 16, 2013.
 Collett-White, Mike (March 11, 2009). "Michael Jackson to add concerts after sellout". Reuters. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Grammy Legend Award". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on January 22, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 "Lifetime Achievement Award". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Michael Jackson and Mariah Carey named the Best Selling Artists of the Millennium. Jet Magazine / World Music Awards. May 29, 2000. And at the close of the century he has sold more records around the world than any single artist in the history of the medium particularly at the end of the 20th century - His Royal Highness Prince Albert of Monaco (World Music Awards 2000)
 "The Vocal Group Hall of Fame: Album Categories 1999 Inductee". The Vocal Group Hall of Fame Foundation. Archived from the original on October 15, 2017.
 Masley, Ed (March 28, 2019). "Stevie Nicks is about to join these 22 men as a two-time Rock and Rock Hall of Fame inductee". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved April 7, 2019.
 Sanneh, Kelefa (June 15, 2002). "Hall of Fame Inducts Songwriters". The New York Times. Retrieved April 11, 2019.
 Keiser, Tom (August 15, 2010). "Photos: Michael Jackson induction ceremony". The News-Times. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Yarborough, Chuck (August 19, 2014). "R&B Music Hall of Fame sets big weekend to induct sophomore class featuring Michael Jackson, Whitney Houston, Marvin Gaye, Norm N. Nite and more". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Ruggieri, Melissa (May 5, 2021). "Black Music Walk of Fame to honor James Brown, OutKast, Usher and others in Atlanta". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Retrieved October 22, 2021.
 "Doctorates of Rock". Rolling Stone. July 19, 2011. Retrieved April 12, 2019.
 "Sanwi kingdom mourns passing of a prince". France 24. June 29, 2009. Retrieved November 28, 2019.
 Leach, Ben (July 9, 2009). "Moon crater named after Michael Jackson". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
 Chivers, Tom (September 28, 2009). "Google's Doodles: 10 of the best including UFOs and Google". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
 Kent State University (January 19, 2012). "Mesoparapylocheles michaeljacksoni: Fossil hermit crab named after Michael Jackson". Phys.org. Retrieved August 4, 2022.
 "80 Moments That Shaped the World" (PDF). British Council. 2014. Retrieved November 26, 2017.
 Harris, John E. (June 24, 2014). "Speaking of Vitiligo..." Vitiligo Clinic & Research Center. Retrieved November 24, 2019.
 Gundersen, Edna (November 24, 2003). "For Jackson, scandal could spell financial ruin". USA Today. Retrieved March 14, 2010.
 Deutsch, Linda (May 4, 2005). "Forensic accountant tells court Jackson is in financial straits". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2017.
 Pulley, Brett (November 21, 2003). "Michael Jackson's Ups And Downs". Forbes. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (August 29, 2018). "Michael Jackson at 60: The King of Pop by the Numbers". Forbes. Retrieved November 14, 2018.
 "Stress killed MJ, says ex-publicist". The Times of India. June 27, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 O'Brien, Timothy L (May 14, 2006). "What Happened to the Fortune Michael Jackson Made?". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved March 16, 2013.
 "Estate of Michael J. Jackson, Deceased, John G. Branca, Co-Executor and John McClain, Co-Executor". August 19, 2016. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2016.
 Gottlieb, Jeff (February 7, 2014). "Michael Jackson estate embroiled in tax fight with IRS". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 31, 2015.
 Sisario, Ben (May 3, 2021). "Michael Jackson's Estate Is Winner in Tax Judge's Ruling". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2021.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (October 14, 2016). "Michael Jackson's Earnings: $825 Million In 2016". Forbes. Retrieved December 11, 2016.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley; Robehmed, Natalie (October 31, 2017). "The Highest-Paid Dead Celebrities of 2018". Forbes. Retrieved October 31, 2018.
 Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (October 30, 2019). "The Real Reason Behind Michael Jackson's Earnings Drop". Forbes. Retrieved November 28, 2019.
 Freeman, Abigail. "The Highest-Paid Dead Celebrities 2021". Forbes. Retrieved October 17, 2022.
 "The Highest-Paid Dead Celebrities of 2023". Forbes.
Print sources
Boepple, Leanne (1995). "Scream: Space Odyssey, Jackson-Style. (video production; Michael and Janet Jackson video)". TCI: Theatre Crafts International. 29. Theatre Crafts International. ISSN 1063-9497.
Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian (2004). The Rolling Stone Album Guide. Fireside. ISBN 978-0-7432-0169-8.
Bronson, Fred (2003). Billboard's Hottest Hot 100 Hits (3rd ed.). Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-7738-0.
Campbell, Lisa D (1993). Michael Jackson: The King of Pop. Branden. ISBN 978-0-8283-1957-7.
Campbell, Lisa D (1995). Michael Jackson: The King of Pop's Darkest Hour. Branden. ISBN 978-0-8283-2003-0.
Christgau, Robert (1981). "Consumer Guide '70s: J". Christgau's Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies. Ticknor & Fields. ISBN 0-89919-026-X. Retrieved February 27, 2019.
DeMello, Margo (2012). Faces Around the World: A Cultural Encyclopedia of the Human Face. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-59884-618-8.
George, Nelson (2004). Michael Jackson: The Ultimate Collection (booklet). Sony BMG.
Inglis, Ian (2006). Performance and Popular Music: History, Place and Time. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-4057-8.
Jackson, Michael (2009) [First published 1988]. Moonwalk. Random House. ISBN 978-0-307-71698-9.
Knopper, Steve (2016). MJ: The Genius of Michael Jackson. Scribner. ISBN 978-1-4767-3037-0.
Lehman, Christopher P. (2008). A Critical History of Soul Train on Television. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-3669-9.
Lewis Jones, Jel D. (2005). Michael Jackson, the King of Pop: The Big Picture: the Music! the Man! the Legend! the Interviews: an Anthology. Amber Books Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9749779-0-4.
Mansour, David (2005). From Abba to Zoom: A Pop Culture Encyclopedia of the Late 20th Century. Andrews McMeel Publishing. ISBN 0-7407-5118-2.
Palmer, Robert (1995). Rock & Roll: An Unruly History. Harmony Books. ISBN 978-0-517-70050-1.
Parameswaran, Radhika (2011). "E-Race-ing Color: Gender and Transnational Visual Economies of Beauty in India". In Sarma Hegde, Radha (ed.). Circuits of Visibility: Gender and Transnational Media Cultures. NYU Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-9060-1.
Ramage, John D.; Bean, John C.; Johnson, June (2001). Writing arguments: a rhetoric with readings. Allyn and Bacon. ISBN 978-0-205-31745-5.
Rojek, Chris (2007). Cultural Studies. Polity. ISBN 978-0-7456-3683-2.
St John, Graham (2004). Rave Culture and Religion. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-31449-7.
Tannenbaum, Rob; Marks, Craig (2011). I Want My MTV: The Uncensored Story of the Music Video Revolution. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-1-101-52641-5.
Taraborrelli, J. Randy (2009). Michael Jackson: The Magic, The Madness, The Whole Story, 1958–2009. Grand Central Publishing, 2009. ISBN 978-0-446-56474-8.
Vogel, Joseph (2012). Man in the Music: The Creative Life and Work of Michael Jackson. New York: Sterling. ISBN 978-1-4027-7938-1.
Young, Julie (Fall 2009). "A Hoosier Thriller: Gary, Indiana's Michael Jackson". Traces of Indiana and Midwestern History. 21 (4). Indianapolis: Indiana Historical Society. Archived from the original on April 15, 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2014.
Further reading
Hidalgo, Susan; Weiner, Robert G. (2010). "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin': MJ in the Scholarly Literature: A Selected Bibliographic Guide" (PDF). The Journal of Pan African Studies. 3 (7).
How Michael Jackson Changed Dance History – biography.com
External links
Listen to this article (1 hour and 50 minutes)
Duration: 1 hour, 49 minutes and 58 seconds.1:49:58
Spoken Wikipedia icon
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 22 February 2019, and does not reflect subsequent edits.
(Audio help · More spoken articles)
Michael Jackson
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
Michael Jackson at Amazon Music
Michael Jackson at the FBI's website
Michael Jackson at IMDb
vte
Michael Jackson
vte
Michael Jackson songs
Awards for Michael Jackson
Articles related to Michael Jackson
Portals:
 Biography
flag United States
icon Pop music
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Michael Jackson1958 births2009 deaths20th-century African-American male singers20th-century American businesspeople20th-century American male singers20th-century American singers20th-century American songwriters21st-century African-American male singers21st-century American businesspeople21st-century American male singers21st-century American songwritersAccidental deaths in CaliforniaAfrican-American businesspeopleAfrican-American choreographersAfrican-American foundersAfrican-American male dancersAfrican-American record producersAfrican-American rock singersAfrican-American songwritersAmerican beatboxersAmerican child pop musiciansAmerican child singersAmerican choreographersAmerican dance-pop musiciansAmerican dancersAmerican disco singersAmerican expatriates in BahrainAmerican expatriates in IrelandAmerican funk singersAmerican HIV/AIDS activistsAmerican male dancersAmerican male pop singersAmerican male songwritersAmerican manslaughter victimsAmerican multi-instrumentalistsAmerican nonprofit businesspeopleAmerican philanthropistsAmerican rhythm and blues singersAmerican rock singersAmerican rock songwritersAmerican soul singersAmerican tenorsAudiobook narratorsBand frontmenBoy sopranosBrit Award winnersBurials at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Glendale)Businesspeople from CaliforniaBusinesspeople from IndianaCulture of Gary, IndianaDancers from CaliforniaDancers from IndianaDrug-related deaths in CaliforniaEpic Records artistsFormer Jehovah's WitnessesFounders of charitiesGrammy Legend Award winnersGrammy Lifetime Achievement Award winnersHistory of Gary, IndianaThe Jackson 5 membersJackson family (show business)Motown artistsMTV Europe Music Award winnersMusic video codirectorsMusicians from Gary, IndianaNew jack swing musiciansPeople from Holmby Hills, Los AngelesPeople from Santa Barbara County, CaliforniaPeople with lupusPeople with vitiligoPost-disco musiciansPresley familyRecord producers from CaliforniaRecord producers from IndianaSingers from CaliforniaSingers from IndianaSongwriters from CaliforniaSongwriters from IndianaWorld Music Awards winnersWorld record holdersWriters from CaliforniaWriters from Gary, Indiana
This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 06:14 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Michael Jackson

275 languages
Add topic



WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Etymology
Subdivisions on the basis of region

Cryofauna
Cryptofauna
Epifauna
Infauna
Limnofauna
Macrofauna
Megafauna
Meiofauna
Mesofauna
Microfauna
Stygofauna
Troglofauna
Xenofauna
Other
Treatises

Classic faunas
See also
References
External links
Fauna

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Fauna (disambiguation).
"Animal Life" redirects here. For the book, see Animal Life (book).

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Fauna" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Simplified schematic of an island's fauna – all its animal species, highlighted in boxes
Fauna (pl.: faunae or faunas) is all of the animal life present in a particular region or time. The corresponding terms for plants and fungi are flora and funga, respectively. Flora, fauna, funga and other forms of life are collectively referred to as biota. Zoologists and paleontologists use fauna to refer to a typical collection of animals found in a specific time or place, e.g. the "Sonoran Desert fauna" or the "Burgess Shale fauna". Paleontologists sometimes refer to a sequence of faunal stages, which is a series of rocks all containing similar fossils. The study of animals of a particular region is called faunistics.

Etymology
Fauna comes from the name Fauna, a Roman goddess of earth and fertility, the Roman god Faunus, and the related forest spirits called Fauns. All three words are cognates of the name of the Greek god Pan, and panis is the Modern Greek equivalent of fauna (πανίς or rather πανίδα). Fauna is also the word for a book that catalogues the animals in such a manner. The term was first used by Carl Linnaeus from Sweden in the title of his 1745[1] work Fauna Suecica.

Subdivisions on the basis of region
Cryofauna
Cryofauna refers to the animals that live in, or very close to, cold areas.

Cryptofauna
Cryptofauna is the fauna that exists in protected or concealed microhabitats.[2]

Epifauna
Epifauna, also called epibenthos, are aquatic animals that live on the bottom substratum as opposed to within it, that is, the benthic fauna that live on top of the sediment surface at the seafloor.

Infauna
Duration: 26 seconds.0:26
This time-lapse movie shows images taken every hour during a two-week period. Worms, bacteria and fish are shown disturbing the sediment as they burrow and move through it.
Infauna are benthic organisms that live within the bottom substratum of a water body, especially within the bottom-most oceanic sediments, the layer of small particles at the bottom of a body of water, rather than on its surface. Bacteria and microalgae may also live in the interstices of bottom sediments. In general, infaunal animals become progressively smaller and less abundant with increasing water depth and distance from shore, whereas bacteria show more constancy in abundance, tending toward one million cells per milliliter of interstitial seawater.

Such creatures are found in the fossil record and include lingulata, trilobites and worms. They made burrows in the sediment as protection and may also have fed upon detritus or the mat of microbes which tended to grow on the surface of the sediment.[3] Today, a variety of organisms live in and disturb the sediment. The deepest burrowers are the ghost shrimps (Thalassinidea), which go as deep as 3 metres (10 ft) into the sediment at the bottom of the ocean.[4]

Limnofauna
Limnofauna refers to the animals that live in fresh water.

Macrofauna
Macrofauna are benthic or soil organisms which are retained on a 0.5 mm sieve. Studies in the deep sea define macrofauna as animals retained on a 0.3 mm sieve to account for the small size of many of the taxa.

Megafauna
Main article: Megafauna

Papuan, Australian and New Zealand fauna. This image was likely first published in the first edition (1876–1899) of the Nordisk familjebok.
Megafauna are large animals of any particular region or time. For example, Australian megafauna.

Meiofauna
Main article: Meiobenthos
Meiofauna are small benthic invertebrates that live in both marine and freshwater environments. The term meiofauna loosely defines a group of organisms by their size, larger than microfauna but smaller than macrofauna, rather than a taxonomic grouping. One environment for meiofauna is between grains of damp sand (see Mystacocarida).

In practice these are metazoan animals that can pass unharmed through a 0.5–1 mm mesh but will be retained by a 30–45 μm mesh,[5] but the exact dimensions will vary from researcher to researcher. Whether an organism passes through a 1 mm mesh also depends upon whether it is alive or dead at the time of sorting.

Mesofauna
Main article: Soil mesofauna
Mesofauna are macroscopic soil animals such as arthropods or nematodes. Mesofauna are extremely diverse; considering just the springtails (Collembola), as of 1998, approximately 6,500 species had been identified.[6]

Microfauna
Main article: Microfauna
Microfauna are microscopic or very small animals (usually including protozoans and very small animals such as rotifers). To qualify as microfauna, an organism must exhibit animal-like characteristics, as opposed to microflora, which are more plant-like.

Stygofauna
Main article: Stygofauna
Stygofauna is any fauna that lives in groundwater systems or aquifers, such as caves, fissures and vugs. Stygofauna and troglofauna are the two types of subterranean fauna (based on life-history). Both are associated with subterranean environments – stygofauna is associated with water, and troglofauna with caves and spaces above the water table. Stygofauna can live within freshwater aquifers and within the pore spaces of limestone, calcrete or laterite, whilst larger animals can be found in cave waters and wells. Stygofaunal animals, like troglofauna, are divided into three groups based on their life history - stygophiles, stygoxenes, and stygobites.[7]

Troglofauna
Main article: Troglofauna

The microscopic cave snail Zospeum tholussum, found at depths of 743 to 1,392 m (2,438 to 4,567 ft) in the Lukina Jama–Trojama cave system of Croatia, is completely blind with a translucent shell
Troglofauna are small cave-dwelling animals that have adapted to their dark surroundings. Troglofauna and stygofauna are the two types of subterranean fauna (based on life-history). Both are associated with subterranean environments – troglofauna is associated with caves and spaces above the water table and stygofauna with water. Troglofaunal species include spiders, insects, myriapods and others. Some troglofauna live permanently underground and cannot survive outside the cave environment. Troglofauna adaptations and characteristics include a heightened sense of hearing, touch and smell.[8] Loss of under-used senses is apparent in the lack of pigmentation as well as eyesight in most troglofauna. Troglofauna insects may exhibit a lack of wings and longer appendages.

Xenofauna
Main article: Extraterrestrial life
Xenofauna, theoretically, are alien organisms that can be described as animal analogues. While no alien life forms, animal-like or otherwise, are known definitively, the concept of alien life remains a subject of great interest in fields like astronomy, astrobiology, biochemistry, evolutionary biology, science fiction, and philosophy.

Other

Examples of fauna in Olleros de Tera (Spain)
Other terms include avifauna, which means "bird fauna" and piscifauna (or ichthyofauna), which means "fish fauna".

Treatises
Classic faunas
Linnaeus, Carolus. Fauna Suecica. 1746
See also
icon	Environment portal
icon	Ecology portal
	Earth sciences portal
Biodiversity
Biome
Ecology
Ecosystem
Environmental movement
Fauna and Flora Preservation Society
Gene pool
Genetic erosion
Genetic pollution
Natural environment
Soil zoology
References
 Wikisource:1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Linnaeus
 NCRI
 Infauna organisms in hydrothermal environments have developed adaptive strategies to survive harsh conditions, such as extreme temperatures, low pH levels, and reduced salinity. They constructed galleries, with the highest abundance in H1, and the dominant classes, Malacostraca and Polychaeta, demonstrating mobility-based strategies like burrowing or crawling. These strategies help infauna cope with hydrothermal influence.” (Rodriguez Uribe 2023). hydrothermal influence refers to the transformative effects of hot water on geological, chemical, and biological systems, and it plays a significant role in a wide range of natural processes and human activities. Vermeij, Geerat (2009), Nature: An Economic History, Princeton University Press, ISBN 9781400826490. p. 266
 Vermeij, Geerat (2009), Nature: An Economic History, Princeton University Press, ISBN 9781400826490. p. 267
 Fauna of Sandy Beaches
 Josef Rusek (1998). "Biodiversity of Collembola and their functional role in the ecosystem". Biodiversity and Conservation. 7 (9): 1207–1219. doi:10.1023/A:1008887817883. S2CID 22883809.
 Rubens M. Lopes, Janet Warner Reid, Carlos Eduardo Falavigna Da Rocha (1999). "Copepoda: developments in ecology, biology and systematics: proceedings of the Seventh international conference on Copepoda, held in Curitiba". Hydrobiologia. 453/454. Springer: 576. ISBN 9780792370482.
 Phil Chapman (1982). "The Origins of Troglobites" (PDF). Proceedings of the University of Bristol Spelæological Society. 16 (2): 133–141.
External links

Look up fauna in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
"Biodiversity of Collembola and their functional role in the ecosystem" (by Josef Rusek; September 1998)
vte
Elements of nature
vte
Fauna of Africa
vte
Fauna of Asia
vte
Fauna of Europe
vte
Fauna of Oceania
vte
Fauna of North America
vte
Fauna of South America
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Animal ecologyEcology terminologyOrganisms
This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 07:07 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Fauna

80 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
History
Traders at Memorabilia
Guest appearances

Film and television
Sport
References
External links
Memorabilia (event)

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Memorabilia was a fan convention event held in the United Kingdom since 1994, aimed at fans and collectors of film, television and sporting memorabilia. The event, now a sister event to the MCM London Comic Con, described itself as "Europe's largest collectors fair for sci-fi, pop, cult tv, comics & film memorabilia."[1] Memorabilia featured exhibit spaces that held screenings, costumed performers greeting fans, celebrity signings, replicas of movie props and sets, and booths for dealers to sell merchandise.[2]

History
The Memorabilia convention took place several times a year. Spring shows generally were held at the NEC Birmingham, and winter shows at the ExCeL Centre in London Docklands.[2]

The convention attracts over 30,000 visitors and about 250 traders. It has in previous years been held three times a year, and with additional events in other locations (notably London, Manchester, and Glasgow).[citation needed]

Memorabilia was purchased by events company MCM Expo Group in 2008[3] and underwent significant change from a trade-focused event in order to attract a wider public audience. Q&A sessions, screening areas and gaming tournaments were added. Several years later, Memorabilia was folded into MCM's London Comic Con. [4]

Celebrity guests were originally found dotted around the hall but in recent shows have been placed together in a special guest area.[citation needed]

Traders at Memorabilia
[icon]	
This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (July 2010)
Guest appearances
In addition to the trading and marketing aspects of Memorabilia, there are also guest appearances from television and film actors and sporting celebrities. Many sign autographs and pose for photographs. Personalities who have appeared at Memorabilia include:

Film and television
The cast of 'Allo 'Allo!
Andrew Secombe, Watto in the Star Wars prequels
Annette Badland, who has appeared in the films Little Voice and Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, and television's Coronation Street
Colin Baker, a former Doctor Who
Tom Baker, a former Doctor Who
David Carradine, Bill in the Kill Bill films
George Lazenby, a former James Bond
George A. Romero, horror film director
Leslie Phillips, veteran actor recently seen in Venus
Michael Madsen, star of Reservoir Dogs, the Kill Bill films and Sin City
Don Calfa, star of The Return of the Living Dead and Chopper Chicks in Zombietown
Craig Charles, most famous for his role as Lister in Red Dwarf and presenter of Robot Wars
Kenny Baker, R2-D2 from Star Wars
Jack Coleman, star of Heroes
Linda Blair, best known as Regan in horror film The Exorcist
Robert Llewellyn, best known for his role as Kryten from Red Dwarf and presenter of Scrapheap Challenge
Sport
Ian Wright, record-breaking Arsenal striker
Jake LaMotta, champion boxer and subject of the film Raging Bull
Smokin' Joe Frazier, former World Heavyweight Champion boxer
Peter Shilton, former England goalkeeper
Trevor Francis, the first million-pound English player
Torrie Wilson, WWE wrestler
References
 "memorabilia.co.uk". memorabilia.co.uk. Archived from the original on 10 February 1999. Retrieved 27 February 2023.
 Geraghty, Lincoln (24 February 2014). Cult Collectors. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781136474309. Retrieved 27 February 2023.
 Quainton, David. "MCM Expo to launch Memorabilia London in 2011". Campaign UK. Retrieved 27 February 2023.
 Bradley, Lee. "NEC Memorabilia/Comic Con Review". leebradley.com. Retrieved 27 February 2023.
External links
Official website of Memorabilia (event)
Categories: MemorabiliaFan conventions in the United Kingdom
This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 12:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Memorabilia (event)

Add languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Levels, scope, and scale of organization

Complexity

Relation to evolution

Human ecology

Relation to the environment

History

See also
Notes
References
External links
Ecology

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Ecology (disambiguation). Not to be confused with ethology, ethnology, etiology, or deep ecology.
Ecology
 
 
Ecology addresses the full scale of life, from tiny bacteria to processes that span the entire planet. Ecologists study many diverse and complex relations among species, such as predation and pollination. The diversity of life is organized into different habitats, from terrestrial to aquatic ecosystems.
Part of a series on
Biology

IndexOutlineGlossary
History (timeline)
Key components
Branches
Research
Applications
icon Biology portal Category
vte
Ecology (from Ancient Greek οἶκος (oîkos) 'house' and -λογία (-logía) 'study of')[A] is the natural science of the relationships among living organisms and their environment. Ecology considers organisms at the individual, population, community, ecosystem, and biosphere levels. Ecology overlaps with the closely related sciences of biogeography, evolutionary biology, genetics, ethology, and natural history.

Ecology is a branch of biology, and is the study of abundance, biomass, and distribution of organisms in the context of the environment. It encompasses life processes, interactions, and adaptations; movement of materials and energy through living communities; successional development of ecosystems; cooperation, competition, and predation within and between species; and patterns of biodiversity and its effect on ecosystem processes.

Ecology has practical applications in fields such as conservation biology, wetland management, natural resource management, and human ecology.

The word ecology (German: Ökologie) was coined in 1866 by the German scientist Ernst Haeckel. The science of ecology as we know it today began with a group of American botanists in the 1890s.[1] Evolutionary concepts relating to adaptation and natural selection are cornerstones of modern ecological theory.

Ecosystems are dynamically interacting systems of organisms, the communities they make up, and the non-living (abiotic) components of their environment. Ecosystem processes, such as primary production, nutrient cycling, and niche construction, regulate the flux of energy and matter through an environment. Ecosystems have biophysical feedback mechanisms that moderate processes acting on living (biotic) and abiotic components of the planet. Ecosystems sustain life-supporting functions and provide ecosystem services like biomass production (food, fuel, fiber, and medicine), the regulation of climate, global biogeochemical cycles, water filtration, soil formation, erosion control, flood protection, and many other natural features of scientific, historical, economic, or intrinsic value.

Levels, scope, and scale of organization
Main article: Outline of ecology
The scope of ecology contains a wide array of interacting levels of organization spanning micro-level (e.g., cells) to a planetary scale (e.g., biosphere) phenomena. Ecosystems, for example, contain abiotic resources and interacting life forms (i.e., individual organisms that aggregate into populations which aggregate into distinct ecological communities). Because ecosystems are dynamic and do not necessarily follow a linear successional route, changes might occur quickly or slowly over thousands of years before specific forest successional stages are brought about by biological processes.

An ecosystem's area can vary greatly, from tiny to vast. A single tree is of little consequence to the classification of a forest ecosystem, but is critically relevant to organisms living in and on it.[2] Several generations of an aphid population can exist over the lifespan of a single leaf. Each of those aphids, in turn, supports diverse bacterial communities.[3] The nature of connections in ecological communities cannot be explained by knowing the details of each species in isolation, because the emergent pattern is neither revealed nor predicted until the ecosystem is studied as an integrated whole.[4] Some ecological principles, however, do exhibit collective properties where the sum of the components explain the properties of the whole, such as birth rates of a population being equal to the sum of individual births over a designated time frame.[5]

The main subdisciplines of ecology, population (or community) ecology and ecosystem ecology, exhibit a difference not only in scale but also in two contrasting paradigms in the field. The former focuses on organisms' distribution and abundance, while the latter focuses on materials and energy fluxes.[6]

Hierarchy
See also: Biological organisation and Biological classification
System behaviors must first be arrayed into different levels of the organization. Behaviors corresponding to higher levels occur at slow rates. Conversely, lower organizational levels exhibit rapid rates. For example, individual tree leaves respond rapidly to momentary changes in light intensity, CO2 concentration, and the like. The growth of the tree responds more slowly and integrates these short-term changes.

O'Neill et al. (1986)[7]: 76 
The scale of ecological dynamics can operate like a closed system, such as aphids migrating on a single tree, while at the same time remaining open about broader scale influences, such as atmosphere or climate. Hence, ecologists classify ecosystems hierarchically by analyzing data collected from finer scale units, such as vegetation associations, climate, and soil types, and integrate this information to identify emergent patterns of uniform organization and processes that operate on local to regional, landscape, and chronological scales.

To structure the study of ecology into a conceptually manageable framework, the biological world is organized into a hierarchy, ranging in scale from (as far as ecology is concerned) organisms, to populations, to guilds, to communities, to ecosystems, to biomes, and up to the level of the biosphere.[8] This framework forms a panarchy[9] and exhibits non-linear behaviors; this means that "effect and cause are disproportionate, so that small changes to critical variables, such as the number of nitrogen fixers, can lead to disproportionate, perhaps irreversible, changes in the system properties."[10]: 14 

Biodiversity
Main article: Biodiversity
Biodiversity refers to the variety of life and its processes. It includes the variety of living organisms, the genetic differences among them, the communities and ecosystems in which they occur, and the ecological and evolutionary processes that keep them functioning, yet ever-changing and adapting.

Noss & Carpenter (1994)[11]: 5 
Biodiversity (an abbreviation of "biological diversity") describes the diversity of life from genes to ecosystems and spans every level of biological organization. The term has several interpretations, and there are many ways to index, measure, characterize, and represent its complex organization.[12][13][14] Biodiversity includes species diversity, ecosystem diversity, and genetic diversity and scientists are interested in the way that this diversity affects the complex ecological processes operating at and among these respective levels.[13][15][16]

Biodiversity plays an important role in ecosystem services which by definition maintain and improve human quality of life.[14][17][18] Conservation priorities and management techniques require different approaches and considerations to address the full ecological scope of biodiversity. Natural capital that supports populations is critical for maintaining ecosystem services[19][20] and species migration (e.g., riverine fish runs and avian insect control) has been implicated as one mechanism by which those service losses are experienced.[21] An understanding of biodiversity has practical applications for species and ecosystem-level conservation planners as they make management recommendations to consulting firms, governments, and industry.[22]

Habitat
Main article: Habitat

Biodiversity of a coral reef. Corals adapt to and modify their environment by forming calcium carbonate skeletons. This provides growing conditions for future generations and forms a habitat for many other species.[23]

Long-tailed broadbill building its nest
The habitat of a species describes the environment over which a species is known to occur and the type of community that is formed as a result.[24] More specifically, "habitats can be defined as regions in environmental space that are composed of multiple dimensions, each representing a biotic or abiotic environmental variable; that is, any component or characteristic of the environment related directly (e.g. forage biomass and quality) or indirectly (e.g. elevation) to the use of a location by the animal."[25]: 745  For example, a habitat might be an aquatic or terrestrial environment that can be further categorized as a montane or alpine ecosystem.

Habitat shifts provide important evidence of competition in nature where one population changes relative to the habitats that most other individuals of the species occupy. For example, one population of a species of tropical lizard (Tropidurus hispidus) has a flattened body relative to the main populations that live in open savanna. The population that lives in an isolated rock outcrop hides in crevasses where its flattened body offers a selective advantage. Habitat shifts also occur in the developmental life history of amphibians, and in insects that transition from aquatic to terrestrial habitats. Biotope and habitat are sometimes used interchangeably, but the former applies to a community's environment, whereas the latter applies to a species' environment.[24][26][27]

Niche
Main article: Ecological niche

Termite mounds with varied heights of chimneys regulate gas exchange, temperature and other environmental parameters that are needed to sustain the internal physiology of the entire colony.[28][29]
Definitions of the niche date back to 1917,[30] but G. Evelyn Hutchinson made conceptual advances in 1957[31][32] by introducing a widely adopted definition: "the set of biotic and abiotic conditions in which a species is able to persist and maintain stable population sizes."[30]: 519  The ecological niche is a central concept in the ecology of organisms and is sub-divided into the fundamental and the realized niche. The fundamental niche is the set of environmental conditions under which a species is able to persist. The realized niche is the set of environmental plus ecological conditions under which a species persists.[30][32][33] The Hutchinsonian niche is defined more technically as a "Euclidean hyperspace whose dimensions are defined as environmental variables and whose size is a function of the number of values that the environmental values may assume for which an organism has positive fitness."[34]: 71 

Biogeographical patterns and range distributions are explained or predicted through knowledge of a species' traits and niche requirements.[35] Species have functional traits that are uniquely adapted to the ecological niche. A trait is a measurable property, phenotype, or characteristic of an organism that may influence its survival. Genes play an important role in the interplay of development and environmental expression of traits.[36] Resident species evolve traits that are fitted to the selection pressures of their local environment. This tends to afford them a competitive advantage and discourages similarly adapted species from having an overlapping geographic range. The competitive exclusion principle states that two species cannot coexist indefinitely by living off the same limiting resource; one will always out-compete the other. When similarly adapted species overlap geographically, closer inspection reveals subtle ecological differences in their habitat or dietary requirements.[37] Some models and empirical studies, however, suggest that disturbances can stabilize the co-evolution and shared niche occupancy of similar species inhabiting species-rich communities.[38] The habitat plus the niche is called the ecotope, which is defined as the full range of environmental and biological variables affecting an entire species.[24]

Niche construction
Main article: Niche construction
See also: Ecosystem engineering
Organisms are subject to environmental pressures, but they also modify their habitats. The regulatory feedback between organisms and their environment can affect conditions from local (e.g., a beaver pond) to global scales, over time and even after death, such as decaying logs or silica skeleton deposits from marine organisms.[39] The process and concept of ecosystem engineering are related to niche construction, but the former relates only to the physical modifications of the habitat whereas the latter also considers the evolutionary implications of physical changes to the environment and the feedback this causes on the process of natural selection. Ecosystem engineers are defined as: "organisms that directly or indirectly modulate the availability of resources to other species, by causing physical state changes in biotic or abiotic materials. In so doing they modify, maintain and create habitats."[40]: 373 

The ecosystem engineering concept has stimulated a new appreciation for the influence that organisms have on the ecosystem and evolutionary process. The term "niche construction" is more often used in reference to the under-appreciated feedback mechanisms of natural selection imparting forces on the abiotic niche.[28][41] An example of natural selection through ecosystem engineering occurs in the nests of social insects, including ants, bees, wasps, and termites. There is an emergent homeostasis or homeorhesis in the structure of the nest that regulates, maintains and defends the physiology of the entire colony. Termite mounds, for example, maintain a constant internal temperature through the design of air-conditioning chimneys. The structure of the nests themselves is subject to the forces of natural selection. Moreover, a nest can survive over successive generations, so that progeny inherit both genetic material and a legacy niche that was constructed before their time.[5][28][29]

Biome
Main article: Biome
Biomes are larger units of organization that categorize regions of the Earth's ecosystems, mainly according to the structure and composition of vegetation.[42] There are different methods to define the continental boundaries of biomes dominated by different functional types of vegetative communities that are limited in distribution by climate, precipitation, weather, and other environmental variables. Biomes include tropical rainforest, temperate broadleaf and mixed forest, temperate deciduous forest, taiga, tundra, hot desert, and polar desert.[43] Other researchers have recently categorized other biomes, such as the human and oceanic microbiomes. To a microbe, the human body is a habitat and a landscape.[44] Microbiomes were discovered largely through advances in molecular genetics, which have revealed a hidden richness of microbial diversity on the planet. The oceanic microbiome plays a significant role in the ecological biogeochemistry of the planet's oceans.[45]

Biosphere
Main article: Biosphere
See also: Earth's spheres
The largest scale of ecological organization is the biosphere: the total sum of ecosystems on the planet. Ecological relationships regulate the flux of energy, nutrients, and climate all the way up to the planetary scale. For example, the dynamic history of the planetary atmosphere's CO2 and O2 composition has been affected by the biogenic flux of gases coming from respiration and photosynthesis, with levels fluctuating over time in relation to the ecology and evolution of plants and animals.[46] Ecological theory has also been used to explain self-emergent regulatory phenomena at the planetary scale: for example, the Gaia hypothesis is an example of holism applied in ecological theory.[47] The Gaia hypothesis states that there is an emergent feedback loop generated by the metabolism of living organisms that maintains the core temperature of the Earth and atmospheric conditions within a narrow self-regulating range of tolerance.[48]

Population ecology
Main article: Population ecology
See also: Lists of organisms by population
Population ecology studies the dynamics of species populations and how these populations interact with the wider environment.[5] A population consists of individuals of the same species that live, interact, and migrate through the same niche and habitat.[49]

A primary law of population ecology is the Malthusian growth model[50] which states, "a population will grow (or decline) exponentially as long as the environment experienced by all individuals in the population remains constant."[50]: 18  Simplified population models usually starts with four variables: death, birth, immigration, and emigration.

An example of an introductory population model describes a closed population, such as on an island, where immigration and emigration does not take place. Hypotheses are evaluated with reference to a null hypothesis which states that random processes create the observed data. In these island models, the rate of population change is described by:

d
⁡
N
(
t
)
d
⁡
t
=
b
N
(
t
)
−
d
N
(
t
)
=
(
b
−
d
)
N
(
t
)
=
r
N
(
t
)
,
{\displaystyle {\frac {\operatorname {d} N(t)}{\operatorname {d} t}}=bN(t)-dN(t)=(b-d)N(t)=rN(t),}
where N is the total number of individuals in the population, b and d are the per capita rates of birth and death respectively, and r is the per capita rate of population change.[50][51]

Using these modeling techniques, Malthus' population principle of growth was later transformed into a model known as the logistic equation by Pierre Verhulst:

d
⁡
N
(
t
)
d
⁡
t
=
r
N
(
t
)
−
α
N
(
t
)
2
=
r
N
(
t
)
(
K
−
N
(
t
)
K
)
,
{\displaystyle {\frac {\operatorname {d} N(t)}{\operatorname {d} t}}=rN(t)-\alpha N(t)^{2}=rN(t)\left({\frac {K-N(t)}{K}}\right),}
where N(t) is the number of individuals measured as biomass density as a function of time, t, r is the maximum per-capita rate of change commonly known as the intrinsic rate of growth, and 
α
{\displaystyle \alpha } is the crowding coefficient, which represents the reduction in population growth rate per individual added. The formula states that the rate of change in population size (
d
N
(
t
)
/
d
t
{\displaystyle \mathrm {d} N(t)/\mathrm {d} t}) will grow to approach equilibrium, where (
d
N
(
t
)
/
d
t
=
0
{\displaystyle \mathrm {d} N(t)/\mathrm {d} t=0}), when the rates of increase and crowding are balanced, 
r
/
α
{\displaystyle r/\alpha }. A common, analogous model fixes the equilibrium, 
r
/
α
{\displaystyle r/\alpha } as K, which is known as the "carrying capacity."

Population ecology builds upon these introductory models to further understand demographic processes in real study populations. Commonly used types of data include life history, fecundity, and survivorship, and these are analyzed using mathematical techniques such as matrix algebra. The information is used for managing wildlife stocks and setting harvest quotas.[51][52] In cases where basic models are insufficient, ecologists may adopt different kinds of statistical methods, such as the Akaike information criterion,[53] or use models that can become mathematically complex as "several competing hypotheses are simultaneously confronted with the data."[54]

Metapopulations and migration
Main article: Metapopulation
See also: Animal migration
The concept of metapopulations was defined in 1969[55] as "a population of populations which go extinct locally and recolonize".[56]: 105  Metapopulation ecology is another statistical approach that is often used in conservation research.[57] Metapopulation models simplify the landscape into patches of varying levels of quality,[58] and metapopulations are linked by the migratory behaviours of organisms. Animal migration is set apart from other kinds of movement because it involves the seasonal departure and return of individuals from a habitat.[59] Migration is also a population-level phenomenon, as with the migration routes followed by plants as they occupied northern post-glacial environments. Plant ecologists use pollen records that accumulate and stratify in wetlands to reconstruct the timing of plant migration and dispersal relative to historic and contemporary climates. These migration routes involved an expansion of the range as plant populations expanded from one area to another. There is a larger taxonomy of movement, such as commuting, foraging, territorial behavior, stasis, and ranging. Dispersal is usually distinguished from migration because it involves the one-way permanent movement of individuals from their birth population into another population.[60][61]

In metapopulation terminology, migrating individuals are classed as emigrants (when they leave a region) or immigrants (when they enter a region), and sites are classed either as sources or sinks. A site is a generic term that refers to places where ecologists sample populations, such as ponds or defined sampling areas in a forest. Source patches are productive sites that generate a seasonal supply of juveniles that migrate to other patch locations. Sink patches are unproductive sites that only receive migrants; the population at the site will disappear unless rescued by an adjacent source patch or environmental conditions become more favorable. Metapopulation models examine patch dynamics over time to answer potential questions about spatial and demographic ecology. The ecology of metapopulations is a dynamic process of extinction and colonization. Small patches of lower quality (i.e., sinks) are maintained or rescued by a seasonal influx of new immigrants. A dynamic metapopulation structure evolves from year to year, where some patches are sinks in dry years and are sources when conditions are more favorable. Ecologists use a mixture of computer models and field studies to explain metapopulation structure.[62][63]

Community ecology

Interspecific interactions such as predation are a key aspect of community ecology.
Main article: Community ecology
Community ecology examines how interactions among species and their environment affect the abundance, distribution and diversity of species within communities.

Johnson & Stinchcomb (2007)[64]: 250 
Community ecology is the study of the interactions among a collection of species that inhabit the same geographic area. Community ecologists study the determinants of patterns and processes for two or more interacting species. Research in community ecology might measure species diversity in grasslands in relation to soil fertility. It might also include the analysis of predator-prey dynamics, competition among similar plant species, or mutualistic interactions between crabs and corals.

Ecosystem ecology
Main article: Ecosystem ecology
These ecosystems, as we may call them, are of the most various kinds and sizes. They form one category of the multitudinous physical systems of the universe, which range from the universe as a whole down to the atom.

Tansley (1935)[65]: 299 

A riparian forest in the White Mountains, New Hampshire (US) is an example of ecosystem ecology
Ecosystems may be habitats within biomes that form an integrated whole and a dynamically responsive system having both physical and biological complexes. Ecosystem ecology is the science of determining the fluxes of materials (e.g. carbon, phosphorus) between different pools (e.g., tree biomass, soil organic material). Ecosystem ecologists attempt to determine the underlying causes of these fluxes. Research in ecosystem ecology might measure primary production (g C/m^2) in a wetland in relation to decomposition and consumption rates (g C/m^2/y). This requires an understanding of the community connections between plants (i.e., primary producers) and the decomposers (e.g., fungi and bacteria).[66]

The underlying concept of an ecosystem can be traced back to 1864 in the published work of George Perkins Marsh ("Man and Nature").[67][68] Within an ecosystem, organisms are linked to the physical and biological components of their environment to which they are adapted.[65] Ecosystems are complex adaptive systems where the interaction of life processes form self-organizing patterns across different scales of time and space.[69] Ecosystems are broadly categorized as terrestrial, freshwater, atmospheric, or marine. Differences stem from the nature of the unique physical environments that shapes the biodiversity within each. A more recent addition to ecosystem ecology are technoecosystems, which are affected by or primarily the result of human activity.[5]

Food webs
Main article: Food web
See also: Food chain

Generalized food web of waterbirds from Chesapeake Bay
A food web is the archetypal ecological network. Plants capture solar energy and use it to synthesize simple sugars during photosynthesis. As plants grow, they accumulate nutrients and are eaten by grazing herbivores, and the energy is transferred through a chain of organisms by consumption. The simplified linear feeding pathways that move from a basal trophic species to a top consumer is called the food chain. Food chains in an ecological community create a complex food web. Food webs are a type of concept map that is used to illustrate and study pathways of energy and material flows.[7][70][71]

Empirical measurements are generally restricted to a specific habitat, such as a cave or a pond, and principles gleaned from small-scale studies are extrapolated to larger systems.[72] Feeding relations require extensive investigations, e.g. into the gut contents of organisms, which can be difficult to decipher, or stable isotopes can be used to trace the flow of nutrient diets and energy through a food web.[73] Despite these limitations, food webs remain a valuable tool in understanding community ecosystems.[74]

Food webs illustrate important principles of ecology: some species have many weak feeding links (e.g., omnivores) while some are more specialized with fewer stronger feeding links (e.g., primary predators). Such linkages explain how ecological communities remain stable over time[75][76] and eventually can illustrate a "complete" web of life.[71][77][78][79]

The disruption of food webs may have a dramatic impact on the ecology of individual species or whole ecosystems. For instance, the replacement of an ant species by another (invasive) ant species has been shown to affect how elephants reduce tree cover and thus the predation of lions on zebras.[80][81]

Trophic levels
Main article: Trophic level

A trophic pyramid (a) and a food-web (b) illustrating ecological relationships among creatures that are typical of a northern boreal terrestrial ecosystem. The trophic pyramid roughly represents the biomass (usually measured as total dry-weight) at each level. Plants generally have the greatest biomass. Names of trophic categories are shown to the right of the pyramid. Some ecosystems, such as many wetlands, do not organize as a strict pyramid, because aquatic plants are not as productive as long-lived terrestrial plants such as trees. Ecological trophic pyramids are typically one of three kinds: 1) pyramid of numbers, 2) pyramid of biomass, or 3) pyramid of energy.[5]: 598 
A trophic level (from Greek troph, τροφή, trophē, meaning "food" or "feeding") is "a group of organisms acquiring a considerable majority of its energy from the lower adjacent level (according to ecological pyramids) nearer the abiotic source."[82]: 383  Links in food webs primarily connect feeding relations or trophism among species. Biodiversity within ecosystems can be organized into trophic pyramids, in which the vertical dimension represents feeding relations that become further removed from the base of the food chain up toward top predators, and the horizontal dimension represents the abundance or biomass at each level.[83] When the relative abundance or biomass of each species is sorted into its respective trophic level, they naturally sort into a 'pyramid of numbers'.[84]

Species are broadly categorized as autotrophs (or primary producers), heterotrophs (or consumers), and Detritivores (or decomposers). Autotrophs are organisms that produce their own food (production is greater than respiration) by photosynthesis or chemosynthesis. Heterotrophs are organisms that must feed on others for nourishment and energy (respiration exceeds production).[5] Heterotrophs can be further sub-divided into different functional groups, including primary consumers (strict herbivores), secondary consumers (carnivorous predators that feed exclusively on herbivores), and tertiary consumers (predators that feed on a mix of herbivores and predators).[85] Omnivores do not fit neatly into a functional category because they eat both plant and animal tissues. It has been suggested that omnivores have a greater functional influence as predators because compared to herbivores, they are relatively inefficient at grazing.[86]

Trophic levels are part of the holistic or complex systems view of ecosystems.[87][88] Each trophic level contains unrelated species that are grouped together because they share common ecological functions, giving a macroscopic view of the system.[89] While the notion of trophic levels provides insight into energy flow and top-down control within food webs, it is troubled by the prevalence of omnivory in real ecosystems. This has led some ecologists to "reiterate that the notion that species clearly aggregate into discrete, homogeneous trophic levels is fiction."[90]: 815  Nonetheless, recent studies have shown that real trophic levels do exist, but "above the herbivore trophic level, food webs are better characterized as a tangled web of omnivores."[91]: 612 

Keystone species
Main article: Keystone species

Sea otters, an example of a keystone species
A keystone species is a species that is connected to a disproportionately large number of other species in the food-web. Keystone species have lower levels of biomass in the trophic pyramid relative to the importance of their role. The many connections that a keystone species holds means that it maintains the organization and structure of entire communities. The loss of a keystone species results in a range of dramatic cascading effects (termed trophic cascades) that alters trophic dynamics, other food web connections, and can cause the extinction of other species.[92][93] The term keystone species was coined by Robert Paine in 1969 and is a reference to the keystone architectural feature as the removal of a keystone species can result in a community collapse just as the removal of the keystone in an arch can result in the arch's loss of stability.[94]

Sea otters (Enhydra lutris) are commonly cited as an example of a keystone species because they limit the density of sea urchins that feed on kelp. If sea otters are removed from the system, the urchins graze until the kelp beds disappear, and this has a dramatic effect on community structure.[95] Hunting of sea otters, for example, is thought to have led indirectly to the extinction of the Steller's sea cow (Hydrodamalis gigas).[96] While the keystone species concept has been used extensively as a conservation tool, it has been criticized for being poorly defined from an operational stance. It is difficult to experimentally determine what species may hold a keystone role in each ecosystem. Furthermore, food web theory suggests that keystone species may not be common, so it is unclear how generally the keystone species model can be applied.[95][97]

Complexity
Main article: Complexity
See also: Emergence
Complexity is understood as a large computational effort needed to piece together numerous interacting parts exceeding the iterative memory capacity of the human mind. Global patterns of biological diversity are complex. This biocomplexity stems from the interplay among ecological processes that operate and influence patterns at different scales that grade into each other, such as transitional areas or ecotones spanning landscapes. Complexity stems from the interplay among levels of biological organization as energy, and matter is integrated into larger units that superimpose onto the smaller parts. "What were wholes on one level become parts on a higher one."[98]: 209  Small scale patterns do not necessarily explain large scale phenomena, otherwise captured in the expression (coined by Aristotle) 'the sum is greater than the parts'.[99][100][E]

"Complexity in ecology is of at least six distinct types: spatial, temporal, structural, process, behavioral, and geometric."[101]: 3  From these principles, ecologists have identified emergent and self-organizing phenomena that operate at different environmental scales of influence, ranging from molecular to planetary, and these require different explanations at each integrative level.[48][102] Ecological complexity relates to the dynamic resilience of ecosystems that transition to multiple shifting steady-states directed by random fluctuations of history.[9][103] Long-term ecological studies provide important track records to better understand the complexity and resilience of ecosystems over longer temporal and broader spatial scales. These studies are managed by the International Long Term Ecological Network (LTER).[104] The longest experiment in existence is the Park Grass Experiment, which was initiated in 1856.[105] Another example is the Hubbard Brook study, which has been in operation since 1960.[106]

Holism
Main article: Holism
Holism remains a critical part of the theoretical foundation in contemporary ecological studies. Holism addresses the biological organization of life that self-organizes into layers of emergent whole systems that function according to non-reducible properties. This means that higher-order patterns of a whole functional system, such as an ecosystem, cannot be predicted or understood by a simple summation of the parts.[107] "New properties emerge because the components interact, not because the basic nature of the components is changed."[5]: 8 

Ecological studies are necessarily holistic as opposed to reductionistic.[36][102][108] Holism has three scientific meanings or uses that identify with ecology: 1) the mechanistic complexity of ecosystems, 2) the practical description of patterns in quantitative reductionist terms where correlations may be identified but nothing is understood about the causal relations without reference to the whole system, which leads to 3) a metaphysical hierarchy whereby the causal relations of larger systems are understood without reference to the smaller parts. Scientific holism differs from mysticism that has appropriated the same term. An example of metaphysical holism is identified in the trend of increased exterior thickness in shells of different species. The reason for a thickness increase can be understood through reference to principles of natural selection via predation without the need to reference or understand the biomolecular properties of the exterior shells.[109]

Relation to evolution
Main article: Evolutionary ecology
Ecology and evolutionary biology are considered sister disciplines of the life sciences. Natural selection, life history, development, adaptation, populations, and inheritance are examples of concepts that thread equally into ecological and evolutionary theory. Morphological, behavioural, and genetic traits, for example, can be mapped onto evolutionary trees to study the historical development of a species in relation to their functions and roles in different ecological circumstances. In this framework, the analytical tools of ecologists and evolutionists overlap as they organize, classify, and investigate life through common systematic principles, such as phylogenetics or the Linnaean system of taxonomy.[110] The two disciplines often appear together, such as in the title of the journal Trends in Ecology and Evolution.[111] There is no sharp boundary separating ecology from evolution, and they differ more in their areas of applied focus. Both disciplines discover and explain emergent and unique properties and processes operating across different spatial or temporal scales of organization.[36][48] While the boundary between ecology and evolution is not always clear, ecologists study the abiotic and biotic factors that influence evolutionary processes,[112][113] and evolution can be rapid, occurring on ecological timescales as short as one generation.[114]

Behavioural ecology
Main article: Behavioural ecology

Social display and colour variation in differently adapted species of chameleons (Bradypodion spp.). Chameleons change their skin colour to match their background as a behavioural defence mechanism and also use colour to communicate with other members of their species, such as dominant (left) versus submissive (right) patterns shown in the three species (A-C) above.[115]
All organisms can exhibit behaviours. Even plants express complex behaviour, including memory and communication.[116] Behavioural ecology is the study of an organism's behaviour in its environment and its ecological and evolutionary implications. Ethology is the study of observable movement or behaviour in animals. This could include investigations of motile sperm of plants, mobile phytoplankton, zooplankton swimming toward the female egg, the cultivation of fungi by weevils, the mating dance of a salamander, or social gatherings of amoeba.[117][118][119][120][121]

Adaptation is the central unifying concept in behavioural ecology.[122] Behaviours can be recorded as traits and inherited in much the same way that eye and hair colour can. Behaviours can evolve by means of natural selection as adaptive traits conferring functional utilities that increases reproductive fitness.[123][124]


Mutualism: Leafhoppers (Eurymela fenestrata) are protected by ants (Iridomyrmex purpureus) in a mutualistic relationship. The ants protect the leafhoppers from predators and stimulate feeding in the leafhoppers, and in return, the leafhoppers feeding on plants exude honeydew from their anus that provides energy and nutrients to tending ants.[125]
Predator-prey interactions are an introductory concept into food-web studies as well as behavioural ecology.[126] Prey species can exhibit different kinds of behavioural adaptations to predators, such as avoid, flee, or defend. Many prey species are faced with multiple predators that differ in the degree of danger posed. To be adapted to their environment and face predatory threats, organisms must balance their energy budgets as they invest in different aspects of their life history, such as growth, feeding, mating, socializing, or modifying their habitat.

Hypotheses posited in behavioural ecology are generally based on adaptive principles of conservation, optimization, or efficiency.[33][112][127] For example, "[t]he threat-sensitive predator avoidance hypothesis predicts that prey should assess the degree of threat posed by different predators and match their behaviour according to current levels of risk"[128] or "[t]he optimal flight initiation distance occurs where expected postencounter fitness is maximized, which depends on the prey's initial fitness, benefits obtainable by not fleeing, energetic escape costs, and expected fitness loss due to predation risk."[129]

Elaborate sexual displays and posturing are encountered in the behavioural ecology of animals. The birds-of-paradise, for example, sing and display elaborate ornaments during courtship. These displays serve a dual purpose of signalling healthy or well-adapted individuals and desirable genes. The displays are driven by sexual selection as an advertisement of quality of traits among suitors.[130]

Cognitive ecology
Cognitive ecology integrates theory and observations from evolutionary ecology and neurobiology, primarily cognitive science, in order to understand the effect that animal interaction with their habitat has on their cognitive systems and how those systems restrict behavior within an ecological and evolutionary framework.[131] "Until recently, however, cognitive scientists have not paid sufficient attention to the fundamental fact that cognitive traits evolved under particular natural settings. With consideration of the selection pressure on cognition, cognitive ecology can contribute intellectual coherence to the multidisciplinary study of cognition."[132][133] As a study involving the 'coupling' or interactions between organism and environment, cognitive ecology is closely related to enactivism,[131] a field based upon the view that "...we must see the organism and environment as bound together in reciprocal specification and selection...".[134]

Social ecology
Main article: Social ecology (academic field)
Social-ecological behaviours are notable in the social insects, slime moulds, social spiders, human society, and naked mole-rats where eusocialism has evolved. Social behaviours include reciprocally beneficial behaviours among kin and nest mates[119][124][135] and evolve from kin and group selection. Kin selection explains altruism through genetic relationships, whereby an altruistic behaviour leading to death is rewarded by the survival of genetic copies distributed among surviving relatives. The social insects, including ants, bees, and wasps are most famously studied for this type of relationship because the male drones are clones that share the same genetic make-up as every other male in the colony.[124] In contrast, group selectionists find examples of altruism among non-genetic relatives and explain this through selection acting on the group; whereby, it becomes selectively advantageous for groups if their members express altruistic behaviours to one another. Groups with predominantly altruistic members survive better than groups with predominantly selfish members.[124][136]

Coevolution
Main article: Coevolution

Bumblebees and the flowers they pollinate have coevolved so that both have become dependent on each other for survival.

Parasitism: A harvestman arachnid being parasitized by mites. The harvestman is being consumed, while the mites benefit from traveling on and feeding off of their host.
Ecological interactions can be classified broadly into a host and an associate relationship. A host is any entity that harbours another that is called the associate.[137] Relationships between species that are mutually or reciprocally beneficial are called mutualisms. Examples of mutualism include fungus-growing ants employing agricultural symbiosis, bacteria living in the guts of insects and other organisms, the fig wasp and yucca moth pollination complex, lichens with fungi and photosynthetic algae, and corals with photosynthetic algae.[138][139] If there is a physical connection between host and associate, the relationship is called symbiosis. Approximately 60% of all plants, for example, have a symbiotic relationship with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi living in their roots forming an exchange network of carbohydrates for mineral nutrients.[140]

Indirect mutualisms occur where the organisms live apart. For example, trees living in the equatorial regions of the planet supply oxygen into the atmosphere that sustains species living in distant polar regions of the planet. This relationship is called commensalism because many others receive the benefits of clean air at no cost or harm to trees supplying the oxygen.[5][141] If the associate benefits while the host suffers, the relationship is called parasitism. Although parasites impose a cost to their host (e.g., via damage to their reproductive organs or propagules, denying the services of a beneficial partner), their net effect on host fitness is not necessarily negative and, thus, becomes difficult to forecast.[142][143] Co-evolution is also driven by competition among species or among members of the same species under the banner of reciprocal antagonism, such as grasses competing for growth space. The Red Queen Hypothesis, for example, posits that parasites track down and specialize on the locally common genetic defense systems of its host that drives the evolution of sexual reproduction to diversify the genetic constituency of populations responding to the antagonistic pressure.[144][145]

Biogeography
Main article: Biogeography
Biogeography (an amalgamation of biology and geography) is the comparative study of the geographic distribution of organisms and the corresponding evolution of their traits in space and time.[146] The Journal of Biogeography was established in 1974.[147] Biogeography and ecology share many of their disciplinary roots. For example, the theory of island biogeography, published by the Robert MacArthur and Edward O. Wilson in 1967[148] is considered one of the fundamentals of ecological theory.[149]

Biogeography has a long history in the natural sciences concerning the spatial distribution of plants and animals. Ecology and evolution provide the explanatory context for biogeographical studies.[146] Biogeographical patterns result from ecological processes that influence range distributions, such as migration and dispersal.[149] and from historical processes that split populations or species into different areas. The biogeographic processes that result in the natural splitting of species explain much of the modern distribution of the Earth's biota. The splitting of lineages in a species is called vicariance biogeography and it is a sub-discipline of biogeography.[150] There are also practical applications in the field of biogeography concerning ecological systems and processes. For example, the range and distribution of biodiversity and invasive species responding to climate change is a serious concern and active area of research in the context of global warming.[151][152]

r/K selection theory
Main article: r/K selection theory
A population ecology concept is r/K selection theory,[D] one of the first predictive models in ecology used to explain life-history evolution. The premise behind the r/K selection model is that natural selection pressures change according to population density. For example, when an island is first colonized, density of individuals is low. The initial increase in population size is not limited by competition, leaving an abundance of available resources for rapid population growth. These early phases of population growth experience density-independent forces of natural selection, which is called r-selection. As the population becomes more crowded, it approaches the island's carrying capacity, thus forcing individuals to compete more heavily for fewer available resources. Under crowded conditions, the population experiences density-dependent forces of natural selection, called K-selection.[153]

In the r/K-selection model, the first variable r is the intrinsic rate of natural increase in population size and the second variable K is the carrying capacity of a population.[33] Different species evolve different life-history strategies spanning a continuum between these two selective forces. An r-selected species is one that has high birth rates, low levels of parental investment, and high rates of mortality before individuals reach maturity. Evolution favours high rates of fecundity in r-selected species. Many kinds of insects and invasive species exhibit r-selected characteristics. In contrast, a K-selected species has low rates of fecundity, high levels of parental investment in the young, and low rates of mortality as individuals mature. Humans and elephants are examples of species exhibiting K-selected characteristics, including longevity and efficiency in the conversion of more resources into fewer offspring.[148][154]

Molecular ecology
Main article: Molecular ecology
The important relationship between ecology and genetic inheritance predates modern techniques for molecular analysis. Molecular ecological research became more feasible with the development of rapid and accessible genetic technologies, such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The rise of molecular technologies and the influx of research questions into this new ecological field resulted in the publication Molecular Ecology in 1992.[155] Molecular ecology uses various analytical techniques to study genes in an evolutionary and ecological context. In 1994, John Avise also played a leading role in this area of science with the publication of his book, Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution.[156]

Newer technologies opened a wave of genetic analysis into organisms once difficult to study from an ecological or evolutionary standpoint, such as bacteria, fungi, and nematodes. Molecular ecology engendered a new research paradigm for investigating ecological questions considered otherwise intractable. Molecular investigations revealed previously obscured details in the tiny intricacies of nature and improved resolution into probing questions about behavioural and biogeographical ecology.[156] For example, molecular ecology revealed promiscuous sexual behaviour and multiple male partners in tree swallows previously thought to be socially monogamous.[157] In a biogeographical context, the marriage between genetics, ecology, and evolution resulted in a new sub-discipline called phylogeography.[158]

Human ecology
Main article: Human ecology
The history of life on Earth has been a history of interaction between living things and their surroundings. To a large extent, the physical form and the habits of the earth's vegetation and its animal life have been molded by the environment. Considering the whole span of earthly time, the opposite effect, in which life actually modifies its surroundings, has been relatively slight. Only within the moment of time represented by the present century has one species man acquired significant power to alter the nature of his world.

Rachel Carson, "Silent Spring"[159]
Ecology is as much a biological science as it is a human science.[5] Human ecology is an interdisciplinary investigation into the ecology of our species. "Human ecology may be defined: (1) from a bioecological standpoint as the study of man as the ecological dominant in plant and animal communities and systems; (2) from a bioecological standpoint as simply another animal affecting and being affected by his physical environment; and (3) as a human being, somehow different from animal life in general, interacting with physical and modified environments in a distinctive and creative way. A truly interdisciplinary human ecology will most likely address itself to all three."[160]: 3  The term was formally introduced in 1921, but many sociologists, geographers, psychologists, and other disciplines were interested in human relations to natural systems centuries prior, especially in the late 19th century.[160][161]

The ecological complexities human beings are facing through the technological transformation of the planetary biome has brought on the Anthropocene. The unique set of circumstances has generated the need for a new unifying science called coupled human and natural systems that builds upon, but moves beyond the field of human ecology.[107] Ecosystems tie into human societies through the critical and all-encompassing life-supporting functions they sustain. In recognition of these functions and the incapability of traditional economic valuation methods to see the value in ecosystems, there has been a surge of interest in social-natural capital, which provides the means to put a value on the stock and use of information and materials stemming from ecosystem goods and services. Ecosystems produce, regulate, maintain, and supply services of critical necessity and beneficial to human health (cognitive and physiological), economies, and they even provide an information or reference function as a living library giving opportunities for science and cognitive development in children engaged in the complexity of the natural world. Ecosystems relate importantly to human ecology as they are the ultimate base foundation of global economics as every commodity, and the capacity for exchange ultimately stems from the ecosystems on Earth.[107][162][163][164]

Restoration Ecology
Main article: Restoration ecology
See also: Natural resource management
Ecosystem management is not just about science nor is it simply an extension of traditional resource management; it offers a fundamental reframing of how humans may work with nature.

Grumbine (1994)[165]: 27 
Ecology is an employed science of restoration, repairing disturbed sites through human intervention, in natural resource management, and in environmental impact assessments. Edward O. Wilson predicted in 1992 that the 21st century "will be the era of restoration in ecology".[166] Ecological science has boomed in the industrial investment of restoring ecosystems and their processes in abandoned sites after disturbance. Natural resource managers, in forestry, for example, employ ecologists to develop, adapt, and implement ecosystem based methods into the planning, operation, and restoration phases of land-use.

Another example of conservation is seen on the east coast of the United States in Boston, MA. The city of Boston implemented the Wetland Ordinance,[167] improving the stability of their wetland environments by implementing soil amendments that will improve groundwater storage and flow, and trimming or removal of vegetation that could cause harm to water quality.[citation needed] Ecological science is used in the methods of sustainable harvesting, disease, and fire outbreak management, in fisheries stock management, for integrating land-use with protected areas and communities, and conservation in complex geo-political landscapes.[22][165][168][169]

Relation to the environment
Main article: Natural environment
The environment of ecosystems includes both physical parameters and biotic attributes. It is dynamically interlinked and contains resources for organisms at any time throughout their life cycle.[5][170] Like ecology, the term environment has different conceptual meanings and overlaps with the concept of nature. Environment "includes the physical world, the social world of human relations and the built world of human creation."[171]: 62  The physical environment is external to the level of biological organization under investigation, including abiotic factors such as temperature, radiation, light, chemistry, climate and geology. The biotic environment includes genes, cells, organisms, members of the same species (conspecifics) and other species that share a habitat.[172]

The distinction between external and internal environments, however, is an abstraction parsing life and environment into units or facts that are inseparable in reality. There is an interpenetration of cause and effect between the environment and life. The laws of thermodynamics, for example, apply to ecology by means of its physical state. With an understanding of metabolic and thermodynamic principles, a complete accounting of energy and material flow can be traced through an ecosystem. In this way, the environmental and ecological relations are studied through reference to conceptually manageable and isolated material parts. After the effective environmental components are understood through reference to their causes; however, they conceptually link back together as an integrated whole, or holocoenotic system as it was once called. This is known as the dialectical approach to ecology. The dialectical approach examines the parts but integrates the organism and the environment into a dynamic whole (or umwelt). Change in one ecological or environmental factor can concurrently affect the dynamic state of an entire ecosystem.[36][173]

Disturbance and resilience
Main article: Resilience (ecology)
A disturbance is any process that changes or removes biomass from a community, such as a fire, flood, drought, or predation.[174] Disturbances are both the cause and product of natural fluctuations within an ecological community.[175][174][176][177] Biodiversity can protect ecosystems from disturbances.[177]

The effect of a disturbance is often hard to predict, but there are numerous examples in which a single species can massively disturb an ecosystem. For example, a single-celled protozoan has been able to kill up to 100% of sea urchins in some coral reefs in the Red Sea and Western Indian Ocean. Sea urchins enable complex reef ecosystems to thrive by eating algae that would otherwise inhibit coral growth.[178] Similarly, invasive species can wreak havoc on ecosystems. For instance, invasive Burmese pythons have caused a 98% decline of small mammals in the Everglades.[179]

Metabolism and the early atmosphere
Main article: Early atmosphere
Metabolism – the rate at which energy and material resources are taken up from the environment, transformed within an organism, and allocated to maintenance, growth and reproduction – is a fundamental physiological trait.

Ernest et al.[180]: 991 
The Earth was formed approximately 4.5 billion years ago.[181] As it cooled and a crust and oceans formed, its atmosphere transformed from being dominated by hydrogen to one composed mostly of methane and ammonia. Over the next billion years, the metabolic activity of life transformed the atmosphere into a mixture of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and water vapor. These gases changed the way that light from the sun hit the Earth's surface and greenhouse effects trapped heat. There were untapped sources of free energy within the mixture of reducing and oxidizing gasses that set the stage for primitive ecosystems to evolve and, in turn, the atmosphere also evolved.[182]


The leaf is the primary site of photosynthesis in many higher plants.
Throughout history, the Earth's atmosphere and biogeochemical cycles have been in a dynamic equilibrium with planetary ecosystems. The history is characterized by periods of significant transformation followed by millions of years of stability.[183] The evolution of the earliest organisms, likely anaerobic methanogen microbes, started the process by converting atmospheric hydrogen into methane (4H2 + CO2 → CH4 + 2H2O). Anoxygenic photosynthesis reduced hydrogen concentrations and increased atmospheric methane, by converting hydrogen sulfide into water or other sulfur compounds (for example, 2H2S + CO2 + hv → CH2O + H2O + 2S). Early forms of fermentation also increased levels of atmospheric methane. The transition to an oxygen-dominant atmosphere (the Great Oxidation) did not begin until approximately 2.4–2.3 billion years ago, but photosynthetic processes started 0.3–1 billion years prior.[183][184]

Radiation: heat, temperature and light
The biology of life operates within a certain range of temperatures. Heat is a form of energy that regulates temperature. Heat affects growth rates, activity, behaviour, and primary production. Temperature is largely dependent on the incidence of solar radiation. The latitudinal and longitudinal spatial variation of temperature greatly affects climates and consequently the distribution of biodiversity and levels of primary production in different ecosystems or biomes across the planet. Heat and temperature relate importantly to metabolic activity. Poikilotherms, for example, have a body temperature that is largely regulated and dependent on the temperature of the external environment. In contrast, homeotherms regulate their internal body temperature by expending metabolic energy.[112][113][173]

There is a relationship between light, primary production, and ecological energy budgets. Sunlight is the primary input of energy into the planet's ecosystems. Light is composed of electromagnetic energy of different wavelengths. Radiant energy from the sun generates heat, provides photons of light measured as active energy in the chemical reactions of life, and also acts as a catalyst for genetic mutation.[112][113][173] Plants, algae, and some bacteria absorb light and assimilate the energy through photosynthesis. Organisms capable of assimilating energy by photosynthesis or through inorganic fixation of H2S are autotrophs. Autotrophs—responsible for primary production—assimilate light energy which becomes metabolically stored as potential energy in the form of biochemical enthalpic bonds.[112][113][173]

Physical environments
Water
Main article: Aquatic ecosystem
Wetland conditions such as shallow water, high plant productivity, and anaerobic substrates provide a suitable environment for important physical, biological, and chemical processes. Because of these processes, wetlands play a vital role in global nutrient and element cycles.

Cronk & Fennessy (2001)[185]: 29 
Diffusion of carbon dioxide and oxygen is approximately 10,000 times slower in water than in air. When soils are flooded, they quickly lose oxygen, becoming hypoxic (an environment with O2 concentration below 2 mg/liter) and eventually completely anoxic where anaerobic bacteria thrive among the roots. Water also influences the intensity and spectral composition of light as it reflects off the water surface and submerged particles.[185] Aquatic plants exhibit a wide variety of morphological and physiological adaptations that allow them to survive, compete, and diversify in these environments. For example, their roots and stems contain large air spaces (aerenchyma) that regulate the efficient transportation of gases (for example, CO2 and O2) used in respiration and photosynthesis.

Salt water plants (halophytes) have additional specialized adaptations, such as the development of special organs for shedding salt and osmoregulating their internal salt (NaCl) concentrations, to live in estuarine, brackish, or oceanic environments. Anaerobic soil microorganisms in aquatic environments use nitrate, manganese ions, ferric ions, sulfate, carbon dioxide, and some organic compounds; other microorganisms are facultative anaerobes and use oxygen during respiration when the soil becomes drier. The activity of soil microorganisms and the chemistry of the water reduces the oxidation-reduction potentials of the water. Carbon dioxide, for example, is reduced to methane (CH4) by methanogenic bacteria.[185] The physiology of fish is also specially adapted to compensate for environmental salt levels through osmoregulation. Their gills form electrochemical gradients that mediate salt excretion in salt water and uptake in fresh water.[186]

Gravity
The shape and energy of the land are significantly affected by gravitational forces. On a large scale, the distribution of gravitational forces on the earth is uneven and influences the shape and movement of tectonic plates as well as influencing geomorphic processes such as orogeny and erosion. These forces govern many of the geophysical properties and distributions of ecological biomes across the Earth.

On the organismal scale, gravitational forces provide directional cues for plant and fungal growth (gravitropism), orientation cues for animal migrations, and influence the biomechanics and size of animals.[112] Ecological traits, such as allocation of biomass in trees during growth are subject to mechanical failure as gravitational forces influence the position and structure of branches and leaves.[187] The cardiovascular systems of animals are functionally adapted to overcome the pressure and gravitational forces that change according to the features of organisms (e.g., height, size, shape), their behaviour (e.g., diving, running, flying), and the habitat occupied (e.g., water, hot deserts, cold tundra).[188]

Pressure
Climatic and osmotic pressure places physiological constraints on organisms, especially those that fly and respire at high altitudes, or dive to deep ocean depths.[189] These constraints influence vertical limits of ecosystems in the biosphere, as organisms are physiologically sensitive and adapted to atmospheric and osmotic water pressure differences.[112] For example, oxygen levels decrease with decreasing pressure and are a limiting factor for life at higher altitudes.[190]

Water transportation by plants is another important ecophysiological process affected by osmotic pressure gradients.[191][192][193] Water pressure in the depths of oceans requires that organisms adapt to these conditions. For example, diving animals such as whales, dolphins, and seals are specially adapted to deal with changes in sound due to water pressure differences.[194] Differences between hagfish species provide another example of adaptation to deep-sea pressure through specialized protein adaptations.[195]

Wind and turbulence

The architecture of the inflorescence in grasses is subject to the physical pressures of wind and shaped by the forces of natural selection facilitating wind-pollination (anemophily).[196][197]
Turbulent forces in air and water affect the environment and ecosystem distribution, form, and dynamics. On a planetary scale, ecosystems are affected by circulation patterns in the global trade winds. Wind power and the turbulent forces it creates can influence heat, nutrient, and biochemical profiles of ecosystems.[112] For example, wind running over the surface of a lake creates turbulence, mixing the water column and influencing the environmental profile to create thermally layered zones, affecting how fish, algae, and other parts of the aquatic ecosystem are structured.[198][199]

Wind speed and turbulence also influence evapotranspiration rates and energy budgets in plants and animals.[185][200] Wind speed, temperature and moisture content can vary as winds travel across different land features and elevations. For example, the westerlies come into contact with the coastal and interior mountains of western North America to produce a rain shadow on the leeward side of the mountain. The air expands and moisture condenses as the winds increase in elevation; this is called orographic lift and can cause precipitation. This environmental process produces spatial divisions in biodiversity, as species adapted to wetter conditions are range-restricted to the coastal mountain valleys and unable to migrate across the xeric ecosystems (e.g., of the Columbia Basin in western North America) to intermix with sister lineages that are segregated to the interior mountain systems.[201][202]

Fire
Main article: Fire ecology


Forest fires modify the land by leaving behind an environmental mosaic that diversifies the landscape into different seral stages and habitats of varied quality (left). Some species are adapted to forest fires, such as pine trees that open their cones only after fire exposure (right).
Plants convert carbon dioxide into biomass and emit oxygen into the atmosphere. By approximately 350 million years ago (the end of the Devonian period), photosynthesis had brought the concentration of atmospheric oxygen above 17%, which allowed combustion to occur.[203] Fire releases CO2 and converts fuel into ash and tar. Fire is a significant ecological parameter that raises many issues pertaining to its control and suppression.[204] While the issue of fire in relation to ecology and plants has been recognized for a long time,[205] Charles Cooper brought attention to the issue of forest fires in relation to the ecology of forest fire suppression and management in the 1960s.[206][207]

Native North Americans were among the first to influence fire regimes by controlling their spread near their homes or by lighting fires to stimulate the production of herbaceous foods and basketry materials.[208] Fire creates a heterogeneous ecosystem age and canopy structure, and the altered soil nutrient supply and cleared canopy structure opens new ecological niches for seedling establishment.[209][210] Most ecosystems are adapted to natural fire cycles. Plants, for example, are equipped with a variety of adaptations to deal with forest fires. Some species (e.g., Pinus halepensis) cannot germinate until after their seeds have lived through a fire or been exposed to certain compounds from smoke. Environmentally triggered germination of seeds is called serotiny.[211][212] Fire plays a major role in the persistence and resilience of ecosystems.[176]

Soils
Main article: Soil ecology
Soil is the living top layer of mineral and organic dirt that covers the surface of the planet. It is the chief organizing centre of most ecosystem functions, and it is of critical importance in agricultural science and ecology. The decomposition of dead organic matter (for example, leaves on the forest floor), results in soils containing minerals and nutrients that feed into plant production. The whole of the planet's soil ecosystems is called the pedosphere where a large biomass of the Earth's biodiversity organizes into trophic levels. Invertebrates that feed and shred larger leaves, for example, create smaller bits for smaller organisms in the feeding chain. Collectively, these organisms are the detritivores that regulate soil formation.[213][214] Tree roots, fungi, bacteria, worms, ants, beetles, centipedes, spiders, mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and other less familiar creatures all work to create the trophic web of life in soil ecosystems.

Soils form composite phenotypes where inorganic matter is enveloped into the physiology of a whole community. As organisms feed and migrate through soils they physically displace materials, an ecological process called bioturbation. This aerates soils and stimulates heterotrophic growth and production. Soil microorganisms are influenced by and are fed back into the trophic dynamics of the ecosystem. No single axis of causality can be discerned to segregate the biological from geomorphological systems in soils.[215][216] Paleoecological studies of soils places the origin for bioturbation to a time before the Cambrian period. Other events, such as the evolution of trees and the colonization of land in the Devonian period played a significant role in the early development of ecological trophism in soils.[214][217][218]

Biogeochemistry and climate
Main article: Biogeochemistry
See also: Nutrient cycle and Climate
Ecologists study and measure nutrient budgets to understand how these materials are regulated, flow, and recycled through the environment.[112][113][173] This research has led to an understanding that there is global feedback between ecosystems and the physical parameters of this planet, including minerals, soil, pH, ions, water, and atmospheric gases. Six major elements (hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus; H, C, N, O, S, and P) form the constitution of all biological macromolecules and feed into the Earth's geochemical processes. From the smallest scale of biology, the combined effect of billions upon billions of ecological processes amplify and ultimately regulate the biogeochemical cycles of the Earth. Understanding the relations and cycles mediated between these elements and their ecological pathways has significant bearing toward understanding global biogeochemistry.[219]

The ecology of global carbon budgets gives one example of the linkage between biodiversity and biogeochemistry. It is estimated that the Earth's oceans hold 40,000 gigatonnes (Gt) of carbon, that vegetation and soil hold 2,070 Gt, and that fossil fuel emissions are 6.3 Gt carbon per year.[220] There have been major restructurings in these global carbon budgets during the Earth's history, regulated to a large extent by the ecology of the land. For example, through the early-mid Eocene volcanic outgassing, the oxidation of methane stored in wetlands, and seafloor gases increased atmospheric CO2 (carbon dioxide) concentrations to levels as high as 3500 ppm.[221]

In the Oligocene, from twenty-five to thirty-two million years ago, there was another significant restructuring of the global carbon cycle as grasses evolved a new mechanism of photosynthesis, C4 photosynthesis, and expanded their ranges. This new pathway evolved in response to the drop in atmospheric CO2 concentrations below 550 ppm.[222] The relative abundance and distribution of biodiversity alters the dynamics between organisms and their environment such that ecosystems can be both cause and effect in relation to climate change.

Human-driven modifications to the planet's ecosystems (e.g., disturbance, biodiversity loss, agriculture) contributes to rising atmospheric greenhouse gas levels. Transformation of the global carbon cycle in the next century is projected to raise planetary temperatures, lead to more extreme fluctuations in weather, alter species distributions, and increase extinction rates. The effect of global warming is already being registered in melting glaciers, melting mountain ice caps, and rising sea levels. Consequently, species distributions are changing along waterfronts and in continental areas where migration patterns and breeding grounds are tracking the prevailing shifts in climate.

Large sections of permafrost are also melting to create a new mosaic of flooded areas having increased rates of soil decomposition activity that raises methane (CH4) emissions. There is concern over increases in atmospheric methane in the context of the global carbon cycle, because methane is a greenhouse gas that is 23 times more effective at absorbing long-wave radiation than CO2 on a 100-year time scale.[223] Hence, there is a relationship between global warming, decomposition and respiration in soils and wetlands producing significant climate feedbacks and globally altered biogeochemical cycles.[107][224][225][226][227][228]

History
Main article: History of ecology
Early beginnings
By ecology, we mean the whole science of the relations of the organism to the environment including, in the broad sense, all the "conditions of existence". Thus, the theory of evolution explains the housekeeping relations of organisms mechanistically as the necessary consequences of effectual causes; and so forms the monistic groundwork of ecology.

Ernst Haeckel (1866)[229]: 140  [B]
Ecology has a complex origin, due in large part to its interdisciplinary nature.[230] Ancient Greek philosophers such as Hippocrates and Aristotle were among the first to record observations on natural history. However, they viewed life in terms of essentialism, where species were conceptualized as static unchanging things while varieties were seen as aberrations of an idealized type. This contrasts against the modern understanding of ecological theory where varieties are viewed as the real phenomena of interest and having a role in the origins of adaptations by means of natural selection.[5][231][232] Early conceptions of ecology, such as a balance and regulation in nature can be traced to Herodotus (died c. 425 BC), who described one of the earliest accounts of mutualism in his observation of "natural dentistry". Basking Nile crocodiles, he noted, would open their mouths to give sandpipers safe access to pluck leeches out, giving nutrition to the sandpiper and oral hygiene for the crocodile.[230] Aristotle was an early influence on the philosophical development of ecology. He and his student Theophrastus made extensive observations on plant and animal migrations, biogeography, physiology, and their behavior, giving an early analogue to the modern concept of an ecological niche.[233][234]

Nowhere can one see more clearly illustrated what may be called the sensibility of such an organic complex, – expressed by the fact that whatever affects any species belonging to it, must speedily have its influence of some sort upon the whole assemblage. He will thus be made to see the impossibility of studying any form completely, out of relation to the other forms, – the necessity for taking a comprehensive survey of the whole as a condition to a satisfactory understanding of any part.

Stephen Forbes (1887)[235]
 

Ernst Haeckel (left) and Eugenius Warming (right), two founders of ecology
Ecological concepts such as food chains, population regulation, and productivity were first developed in the 1700s, through the published works of microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) and botanist Richard Bradley (1688?–1732).[5] Biogeographer Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859) was an early pioneer in ecological thinking and was among the first to recognize ecological gradients, where species are replaced or altered in form along environmental gradients, such as a cline forming along a rise in elevation. Humboldt drew inspiration from Isaac Newton, as he developed a form of "terrestrial physics". In Newtonian fashion, he brought a scientific exactitude for measurement into natural history and even alluded to concepts that are the foundation of a modern ecological law on species-to-area relationships.[236][237][238] Natural historians, such as Humboldt, James Hutton, and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (among others) laid the foundations of the modern ecological sciences.[239] The term "ecology" (German: Oekologie, Ökologie) was coined by Ernst Haeckel in his book Generelle Morphologie der Organismen (1866).[240] Haeckel was a zoologist, artist, writer, and later in life a professor of comparative anatomy.[229][241]

Opinions differ on who was the founder of modern ecological theory. Some mark Haeckel's definition as the beginning;[242] others say it was Eugenius Warming with the writing of Oecology of Plants: An Introduction to the Study of Plant Communities (1895),[243] or Carl Linnaeus' principles on the economy of nature that matured in the early 18th century.[244][245] Linnaeus founded an early branch of ecology that he called the economy of nature.[244] His works influenced Charles Darwin, who adopted Linnaeus' phrase on the economy or polity of nature in The Origin of Species.[229] Linnaeus was the first to frame the balance of nature as a testable hypothesis. Haeckel, who admired Darwin's work, defined ecology in reference to the economy of nature, which has led some to question whether ecology and the economy of nature are synonymous.[245]


The layout of the first ecological experiment, carried out in a grass garden at Woburn Abbey in 1816, was noted by Charles Darwin in The Origin of Species. The experiment studied the performance of different mixtures of species planted in different kinds of soils.[246][247]
From Aristotle until Darwin, the natural world was predominantly considered static and unchanging. Prior to The Origin of Species, there was little appreciation or understanding of the dynamic and reciprocal relations between organisms, their adaptations, and the environment.[231] An exception is the 1789 publication Natural History of Selborne by Gilbert White (1720–1793), considered by some to be one of the earliest texts on ecology.[248] While Charles Darwin is mainly noted for his treatise on evolution,[249] he was one of the founders of soil ecology,[250] and he made note of the first ecological experiment in The Origin of Species.[246] Evolutionary theory changed the way that researchers approached the ecological sciences.[251]

Since 1900
Modern ecology is a young science that first attracted substantial scientific attention toward the end of the 19th century (around the same time that evolutionary studies were gaining scientific interest). The scientist Ellen Swallow Richards adopted the term "oekology" (which eventually morphed into home economics) in the U.S. as early as 1892.[252]

In the early 20th century, ecology transitioned from a more descriptive form of natural history to a more analytical form of scientific natural history.[236][239][253] Frederic Clements published the first American ecology book, Research Methods in Ecology in 1905,[254] presenting the idea of plant communities as a superorganism. This publication launched a debate between ecological holism and individualism that lasted until the 1970s. Clements' superorganism concept proposed that ecosystems progress through regular and determined stages of seral development that are analogous to the developmental stages of an organism. The Clementsian paradigm was challenged by Henry Gleason,[255] who stated that ecological communities develop from the unique and coincidental association of individual organisms. This perceptual shift placed the focus back onto the life histories of individual organisms and how this relates to the development of community associations.[256]

The Clementsian superorganism theory was an overextended application of an idealistic form of holism.[36][109] The term "holism" was coined in 1926 by Jan Christiaan Smuts, a South African general and polarizing historical figure who was inspired by Clements' superorganism concept.[257][C] Around the same time, Charles Elton pioneered the concept of food chains in his classical book Animal Ecology.[84] Elton[84] defined ecological relations using concepts of food chains, food cycles, and food size, and described numerical relations among different functional groups and their relative abundance. Elton's 'food cycle' was replaced by 'food web' in a subsequent ecological text.[258] Alfred J. Lotka brought in many theoretical concepts applying thermodynamic principles to ecology.

In 1942, Raymond Lindeman wrote a landmark paper on the trophic dynamics of ecology, which was published posthumously after initially being rejected for its theoretical emphasis. Trophic dynamics became the foundation for much of the work to follow on energy and material flow through ecosystems. Robert MacArthur advanced mathematical theory, predictions, and tests in ecology in the 1950s, which inspired a resurgent school of theoretical mathematical ecologists.[239][259][260] Ecology has also developed through contributions from other nations, including Russia's Vladimir Vernadsky and his founding of the biosphere concept in the 1920s[261] and Japan's Kinji Imanishi and his concepts of harmony in nature and habitat segregation in the 1950s.[262] Scientific recognition of contributions to ecology from non-English-speaking cultures is hampered by language and translation barriers.[261]

This whole chain of poisoning, then, seems to rest on a base of minute plants which must have been the original concentrators. But what of the opposite end of the food chain—the human being who, in probable ignorance of all this sequence of events, has rigged his fishing tackle, caught a string of fish from the waters of Clear Lake, and taken them home to fry for his supper?

Rachel Carson (1962)[263]: 48 
Ecology surged in popular and scientific interest during the 1960–1970s environmental movement. There are strong historical and scientific ties between ecology, environmental management, and protection.[239] The historical emphasis and poetic naturalistic writings advocating the protection of wild places by notable ecologists in the history of conservation biology, such as Aldo Leopold and Arthur Tansley, have been seen as far removed from urban centres where, it is claimed, the concentration of pollution and environmental degradation is located.[239][264] Palamar (2008)[264] notes an overshadowing by mainstream environmentalism of pioneering women in the early 1900s who fought for urban health ecology (then called euthenics)[252] and brought about changes in environmental legislation. Women such as Ellen Swallow Richards and Julia Lathrop, among others, were precursors to the more popularized environmental movements after the 1950s.

In 1962, marine biologist and ecologist Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring helped to mobilize the environmental movement by alerting the public to toxic pesticides, such as DDT (C14H9Cl5), bioaccumulating in the environment. Carson used ecological science to link the release of environmental toxins to human and ecosystem health. Since then, ecologists have worked to bridge their understanding of the degradation of the planet's ecosystems with environmental politics, law, restoration, and natural resources management.[22][239][264][265]

See also
icon	Biology portal
icon	Ecology portal
icon	Plants portal
icon	Trees portal
icon	Water portal
Carrying capacity
Chemical ecology
Climate justice
Circles of Sustainability
Cultural ecology
Dialectical naturalism
Ecological death
Ecological empathy
Ecological overshoot
Ecological psychology
Ecology movement
Ecosophy
Ecopsychology
Human ecology
Industrial ecology
Information ecology
Landscape ecology
Natural resource
Normative science
Philosophy of ecology
Political ecology
Theoretical ecology
Sensory ecology
Sexecology
Spiritual ecology
Sustainable development
Lists
Glossary of ecology
Index of biology articles
List of ecologists
Outline of biology
Terminology of ecology
Notes
 In Ernst Haeckel's (1866) footnote where the term ecology originates, he also gives attribute to Ancient Greek: χώρας, romanized: khōrā, lit. 'χωρα', meaning "dwelling place, distributional area" —quoted from Stauffer (1957).
 This is a copy of Haeckel's original definition (Original: Haeckel, E. (1866) Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Allgemeine Grundzige der organischen Formen- Wissenschaft, mechanisch begriindet durch die von Charles Darwin reformirte Descendenz-Theorie. 2 vols. Reimer, Berlin.) translated and quoted from Stauffer (1957).
 Foster & Clark (2008) note how Smut's holism contrasts starkly against his racial political views as the father of apartheid.
 First introduced in MacArthur & Wilson's (1967) book of notable mention in the history and theoretical science of ecology, The Theory of Island Biogeography.
 Aristotle wrote about this concept in Metaphysics (Quoted from The Internet Classics Archive translation by W. D. Ross. Book VIII, Part 6): "To return to the difficulty which has been stated with respect both to definitions and to numbers, what is the cause of their unity? In the case of all things which have several parts and in which the totality is not, as it were, a mere heap, but the whole is something besides the parts, there is a cause; for even in bodies contact is the cause of unity in some cases and in others viscosity or some other such quality."
References
 S. E. Kingsland, "Foundational Papers: Defining Ecology as a Science", in L. A. Real and J. H. Brown, eds., Foundations of Ecology: Classic Papers with Commentaries. Chicago: U of Chicago Press, 1991. pp. 1–2.
 Stadler, B.; Michalzik, B.; Müller, T. (1998). "Linking aphid ecology with nutrient fluxes in a coniferous forest". Ecology. 79 (5): 1514–1525. doi:10.1890/0012-9658(1998)079[1514:LAEWNF]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9658.
 Humphreys, N. J.; Douglas, A. E. (1997). "Partitioning of symbiotic bacteria between generations of an insect: a quantitative study of a Buchnera sp. in the pea aphid (Acyrthosiphon pisum) reared at different temperatures". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 63 (8): 3294–3296. Bibcode:1997ApEnM..63.3294H. doi:10.1128/AEM.63.8.3294-3296.1997. PMC 1389233. PMID 16535678.
 Liere, Heidi; Jackson, Doug; Vandermeer, John; Wilby, Andrew (20 September 2012). "Ecological Complexity in a Coffee Agroecosystem: Spatial Heterogeneity, Population Persistence and Biological Control". PLOS ONE. 7 (9): e45508. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...745508L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0045508. PMC 3447771. PMID 23029061.
 Odum, E. P.; Barrett, G. W. (2005). Fundamentals of Ecology. Brooks Cole. p. 598. ISBN 978-0-534-42066-6. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 6 January 2020.
 Steward T.A. Pickett; Jurek Kolasa; Clive G. Jones (1994). Ecological Understanding: The Nature of Theory and the Theory of Nature. San Diego: Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-554720-8.
 O'Neill, D. L.; Deangelis, D. L.; Waide, J. B.; Allen, T. F. H. (1986). A Hierarchical Concept of Ecosystems. Princeton University Press. p. 253. ISBN 0-691-08436-X.
 Nachtomy, Ohad; Shavit, Ayelet; Smith, Justin (2002). "Leibnizian organisms, nested individuals, and units of selection". Theory in Biosciences. 121 (2): 205–230. doi:10.1007/s12064-002-0020-9. S2CID 23760946.
 Holling, C. S. (2004). "Understanding the complexity of economic, ecological, and social systems". Ecosystems. 4 (5): 390–405. doi:10.1007/s10021-001-0101-5. S2CID 7432683.
 Levin, S. A. (1999). Fragile Dominion: Complexity and the Commons. Reading, MA: Perseus Books. ISBN 978-0-7382-0319-5. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Noss, R. F.; Carpenter, A. Y. (1994). Saving Nature's Legacy: Protecting and Restoring Biodiversity. Island Press. p. 443. ISBN 978-1-55963-248-5. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Noss, R. F. (1990). "Indicators for monitoring biodiversity: A hierarchical approach". Conservation Biology. 4 (4): 355–364. Bibcode:1990ConBi...4..355N. doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.1990.tb00309.x. JSTOR 2385928.
 Scholes, R. J.; Mace, G. M.; Turner, W.; Geller, G. N.; Jürgens, N.; Larigauderie, A.; Muchoney, D.; Walther, B. A.; Mooney, H. A. (2008). "Toward a global biodiversity observing system" (PDF). Science. 321 (5892): 1044–1045. doi:10.1126/science.1162055. PMID 18719268. S2CID 206514712. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 July 2011.
 Cardinale, Bradley J.; Duffy, J. Emmett; Gonzalez, Andrew; Hooper, David U.; Perrings, Charles; Venail, Patrick; Narwani, Anita; Mace, Georgina M.; Tilman, David; Wardle, David A.; Kinzig, Ann P.; Daily, Gretchen C.; Loreau, Michel; Grace, James B.; Larigauderie, Anne; Srivastava, Diane S.; Naeem, Shahid (6 June 2012). "Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity" (PDF). Nature. 486 (7401): 59–67. Bibcode:2012Natur.486...59C. doi:10.1038/nature11148. PMID 22678280. S2CID 4333166. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2017. Retrieved 10 August 2019.
 Wilson, E. O. (2000). "A global biodiversity map". Science. 289 (5488): 2279. PMID 11041790.
 Purvis, A.; Hector, A. (2000). "Getting the measure of biodiversity" (PDF). Nature. 405 (6783): 212–218. doi:10.1038/35012221. PMID 10821281. S2CID 4333920. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 April 2014.
 Ostfeld, R. S. (2009). "Biodiversity loss and the rise of zoonotic pathogens". Clinical Microbiology and Infection. 15 (s1): 40–43. doi:10.1111/j.1469-0691.2008.02691.x. PMID 19220353.
 Tierney, Geraldine L.; Faber-Langendoen, Don; Mitchell, Brian R.; Shriver, W. Gregory; Gibbs, James P. (2009). "Monitoring and evaluating the ecological integrity of forest ecosystems" (PDF). Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 7 (6): 308–316. Bibcode:2009FrEE....7..308T. doi:10.1890/070176. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2010. Retrieved 1 February 2010.
 Ceballos, G.; Ehrlich, P. R. (2002). "Mammal population losses and the extinction crisis" (PDF). Science. 296 (5569): 904–907. Bibcode:2002Sci...296..904C. doi:10.1126/science.1069349. PMID 11988573. S2CID 32115412. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 16 March 2010.
 Palumbi, Stephen R.; Sandifer, Paul A.; Allan, J. David; Beck, Michael W.; Fautin, Daphne G.; Fogarty, Michael J.; Halpern, Benjamin S.; Incze, Lewis S.; Leong, Jo-Ann; et al. (2009). "Managing for ocean biodiversity to sustain marine ecosystem services" (PDF). Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 7 (4): 204–211. Bibcode:2009FrEE....7..204P. doi:10.1890/070135. hdl:1808/13308. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 June 2010.
 Wilcove, D. S.; Wikelski, M. (2008). "Going, going, gone: Is animal migration disappearing". PLOS Biology. 6 (7): e188. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060188. PMC 2486312. PMID 18666834.
 Hammond, H. (2009). Maintaining Whole Systems on the Earth's Crown: Ecosystem-based Conservation Planning for the Boreal Forest. Slocan Park, BC: Silva Forest Foundation. p. 380. ISBN 978-0-9734779-0-0. Archived from the original on 5 December 2009. Retrieved 31 January 2010.
 Kiessling, W.; Simpson, C.; Foote, M. (2009). "Reefs as cradles of evolution and sources of biodiversity in the Phanerozoic" (PDF). Science. 327 (5962): 196–198. Bibcode:2010Sci...327..196K. doi:10.1126/science.1182241. PMID 20056888. S2CID 206523585. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2011. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
 Whittaker, R. H.; Levin, S. A.; Root, R. B. (1973). "Niche, habitat, and ecotope" (PDF). The American Naturalist. 107 (955): 321–338. Bibcode:1973ANat..107..321W. doi:10.1086/282837. S2CID 84504783. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 September 2012.
 Beyer, Hawthorne L.; Haydon, Daniel T.; Morales, Juan M.; Frair, Jacqueline L.; Hebblewhite, Mark; Mitchell, Michael; Matthiopoulos, Jason (2010). "The interpretation of habitat preference metrics under use–availability designs". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 365 (1550): 2245–2254. doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0083. PMC 2894962. PMID 20566501.
 Schoener, T. W. (1975). "Presence and absence of habitat shift in some widespread lizard species". Ecological Monographs. 45 (3): 233–258. Bibcode:1975EcoM...45..233S. doi:10.2307/1942423. JSTOR 1942423.
 Vitt, L. J.; Caldwell, J. P.; Zani, P. A.; Titus, T. A. (1997). "The role of habitat shift in the evolution of lizard morphology: Evidence from tropical Tropidurus". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 94 (8): 3828–3832. Bibcode:1997PNAS...94.3828V. doi:10.1073/pnas.94.8.3828. PMC 20526. PMID 9108063.
 Laland, K. N.; Odling-Smee, F. J.; Feldman, M. W. (1999). "Evolutionary consequences of niche construction and their implications for ecology". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 96 (18): 10242–10247. Bibcode:1999PNAS...9610242L. doi:10.1073/pnas.96.18.10242. PMC 17873. PMID 10468593.
 Hughes, D. P.; Pierce, N. E.; Boomsma, J. J. (2008). "Social insect symbionts: evolution in homeostatic fortresses" (PDF). Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 23 (12): 672–677. Bibcode:2008TEcoE..23..672H. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2008.07.011. PMID 18951653. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2010.
 Wiens, J. J.; Graham, C. H. (2005). "Niche conservatism: Integrating evolution, ecology, and conservation biology" (PDF). Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 36: 519–539. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.36.102803.095431. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 October 2012.
 Hutchinson, G. E. (1957). A Treatise on Limnology. New York: Wiley. p. 1015. ISBN 0-471-42572-9.
 Hutchinson, G. E. (1957). "Concluding remarks". Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. 22 (797): 415–427. doi:10.1101/SQB.1957.022.01.039.
 Begon, M.; Townsend, C. R.; Harper, J. L. (2005). Ecology: From Individuals to Ecosystems (4th ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. p. 752. ISBN 1-4051-1117-8. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved 14 December 2010.
 D. L., Hardesty (1975). "The niche concept: suggestions for its use in human ecology". Human Ecology. 3 (2): 71–85. Bibcode:1975HumEc...3...71H. doi:10.1007/BF01552263. JSTOR 4602315. S2CID 84328940.
 Pearman, P. B.; Guisan, A.; Broennimann, O.; Randin, C. F. (2008). "Niche dynamics in space and time". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 23 (3): 149–158. Bibcode:2008TEcoE..23..149P. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2007.11.005. PMID 18289716.
 Levins, R.; Lewontin, R. (1980). "Dialectics and reductionism in ecology" (PDF). Synthese. 43: 47–78. doi:10.1007/bf00413856. S2CID 46984334. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2013.
 Hardin, G. (1960). "The competitive exclusion principal". Science. 131 (3409): 1292–1297. Bibcode:1960Sci...131.1292H. doi:10.1126/science.131.3409.1292. PMID 14399717. S2CID 18542809.
 Scheffer, M.; van Nes, E. H. (2006). "Self-organized similarity, the evolutionary emergence of groups of similar species". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 103 (16): 6230–6235. Bibcode:2006PNAS..103.6230S. doi:10.1073/pnas.0508024103. PMC 1458860. PMID 16585519.
 Hastings, Alan; Byers, James E.; Crooks, Jeffrey A.; Cuddington, Kim; Jones, Clive G.; Lambrinos, John G.; Talley, Theresa S.; Wilson, William G. (2007). "Ecosystem engineering in space and time". Ecology Letters. 10 (2): 153–164. Bibcode:2007EcolL..10..153H. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2006.00997.x. PMID 17257103. S2CID 44870405.
 Jones, Clive G.; Lawton, John H.; Shachak, Moshe (1994). "Organisms as ecosystem engineers". Oikos. 69 (3): 373–386. Bibcode:1994Oikos..69..373J. doi:10.2307/3545850. JSTOR 3545850.
 Wright, J. P.; Jones, C.G. (2006). "The concept of organisms as ecosystem engineers ten years on: Progress, limitations, and challenges". BioScience. 56 (3): 203–209. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2006)056[0203:TCOOAE]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0006-3568.
 Palmer, M.; White, P. S. (1994). "On the existence of ecological communities" (PDF). Journal of Vegetation Sciences. 5 (2): 279–282. Bibcode:1994JVegS...5..279P. doi:10.2307/3236162. JSTOR 3236162. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 September 2012.
 Prentice; I. C.; Harrison, S. P.; Leemans, R.; Monserud, R. A.; Solomon, A. M. (1992). "Special paper: A global biome model based on plant physiology and dominance, soil properties and climate" (PDF). Journal of Biogeography. 19 (2): 117–134. Bibcode:1992JBiog..19..117P. doi:10.2307/2845499. JSTOR 2845499. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2022.
 Turnbaugh, Peter J.; Ley, Ruth E.; Hamady, Micah; Fraser-Liggett, Claire M.; Knight, Rob; Gordon, Jeffrey I. (2007). "The human microbiome project". Nature. 449 (7164): 804–810. Bibcode:2007Natur.449..804T. doi:10.1038/nature06244. PMC 3709439. PMID 17943116.
 DeLong, E. F. (2009). "The microbial ocean from genomes to biomes" (PDF). Nature. 459 (7244): 200–206. Bibcode:2009Natur.459..200D. doi:10.1038/nature08059. hdl:1721.1/69838. PMID 19444206. S2CID 205216984. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 14 January 2010.
 Igamberdiev, Abir U.; Lea, P. J. (2006). "Land plants equilibrate O2 and CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere" (PDF). Photosynthesis Research. 87 (2): 177–194. Bibcode:2006PhoRe..87..177I. doi:10.1007/s11120-005-8388-2. PMID 16432665. S2CID 10709679. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016.
 Lovelock, J.E.; Margulis, L. (1974). "Atmospheric homeostasis by and for the biosphere: the gaia hypothesis". Tellus A. 26 (1–2): 2–10. Bibcode:1974Tell...26....2L. doi:10.3402/tellusa.v26i1-2.9731. S2CID 129803613.
 Lovelock, J. (2003). "The living Earth". Nature. 426 (6968): 769–770. Bibcode:2003Natur.426..769L. doi:10.1038/426769a. PMID 14685210. S2CID 30308855.
 Waples, R. S.; Gaggiotti, O. (2006). "What is a population? An empirical evaluation of some genetic methods for identifying the number of gene pools and their degree of connectivity". Molecular Ecology. 15 (6): 1419–1439. doi:10.1111/j.1365-294X.2006.02890.x. PMID 16629801. S2CID 9715923. Archived from the original on 25 October 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019.
 Turchin, P. (2001). "Does population ecology have general laws?". Oikos. 94 (1): 17–26. Bibcode:2001Oikos..94...17T. doi:10.1034/j.1600-0706.2001.11310.x. S2CID 27090414.
 Vandermeer, J. H.; Goldberg, D. E. (2003). Population Ecology: First Principles. Woodstock, Oxfordshire: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11440-4.
 Berryman, A. A. (1992). "The origins and evolution of predator-prey theory". Ecology. 73 (5): 1530–1535. Bibcode:1992Ecol...73.1530B. doi:10.2307/1940005. JSTOR 1940005. S2CID 84321947.
 Anderson, D. R.; Burnham, K. P.; Thompson, W. L. (2000). "Null hypotheses testing: Problems, prevalence, and an alternative" (PDF). J. Wildl. Manage. 64 (4): 912–923. doi:10.2307/3803199. JSTOR 3803199. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 4 August 2012.
 Johnson, J. B.; Omland, K. S. (2004). "Model selection in ecology and evolution" (PDF). Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 19 (2): 101–108. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.401.777. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2003.10.013. PMID 16701236. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 October 2012.
 Levins, R. (1969). "Some demographic and genetic consequences of environmental heterogeneity for biological control". Bulletin of the Entomological Society of America. 15 (3): 237–240. doi:10.1093/besa/15.3.237. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
 Levins, R. (1970). "Extinction". In Gerstenhaber, M. (ed.). Some Mathematical Questions in Biology. American Mathematical Soc. pp. 77–107. ISBN 978-0-8218-1152-8. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Smith, M. A.; Green, D. M. (2005). "Dispersal and the metapopulation paradigm in amphibian ecology and conservation: Are all amphibian populations metapopulations?". Ecography. 28 (1): 110–128. Bibcode:2005Ecogr..28..110A. doi:10.1111/j.0906-7590.2005.04042.x.
 Hanski, I. (1998). "Metapopulation dynamics" (PDF). Nature. 396 (6706): 41–49. Bibcode:1998Natur.396...41H. doi:10.1038/23876. S2CID 4405264. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 December 2010.
 Nebel, S. (2010). "Animal migration". Nature Education Knowledge. 10 (1): 29. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011.
 Clark, J. S.; Fastie, C.; Hurtt, G.; Jackson, S. T.; Johnson, C.; King, G. A.; Lewis, M.; Lynch, J.; Pacala, S.; et al. (1998). "Reid's paradox of rapid plant migration" (PDF). BioScience. 48 (1): 13–24. doi:10.2307/1313224. JSTOR 1313224. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 July 2011.
 Dingle, H. (18 January 1996). Migration: The Biology of Life on the Move. Oxford University Press. p. 480. ISBN 0-19-509723-8. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Hanski, I.; Gaggiotti, O. E., eds. (2004). Ecology, Genetics and Evolution of Metapopulations. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-323448-4. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 MacKenzie; D.I. (2006). Occupancy Estimation and Modeling: Inferring Patterns and Dynamics of Species Occurrence. London: Elsevier Academic Press. p. 324. ISBN 978-0-12-088766-8. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Johnson, M. T.; Strinchcombe, J. R. (2007). "An emerging synthesis between community ecology and evolutionary biology". Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 22 (5): 250–257. Bibcode:2007TEcoE..22..250J. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2007.01.014. PMID 17296244.
 Tansley, A. G. (1935). "The use and abuse of vegetational concepts and terms" (PDF). Ecology. 16 (3): 284–307. Bibcode:1935Ecol...16..284T. doi:10.2307/1930070. JSTOR 1930070. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011.
 Brinson, M. M.; Lugo, A. E.; Brown, S (1981). "Primary Productivity, Decomposition and Consumer Activity in Freshwater Wetlands". Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 12 (1): 123–161. Bibcode:1981AnRES..12..123B. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.12.110181.001011.
 Marsh, G. P. (1864). Man and Nature: Physical Geography as Modified by Human Action. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. p. 560.
 O'Neil, R. V. (2001). "Is it time to bury the ecosystem concept? (With full military honors, of course!)" (PDF). Ecology. 82 (12): 3275–3284. doi:10.1890/0012-9658(2001)082[3275:IITTBT]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9658. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2011.
 Levin, S. A. (1998). "Ecosystems and the biosphere as complex adaptive systems". Ecosystems. 1 (5): 431–436. Bibcode:1998Ecosy...1..431L. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.83.6318. doi:10.1007/s100219900037. S2CID 29793247.
 Pimm, S. (2002). Food Webs. University of Chicago Press. p. 258. ISBN 978-0-226-66832-1. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Pimm, S. L.; Lawton, J. H.; Cohen, J. E. (1991). "Food web patterns and their consequences" (PDF). Nature. 350 (6320): 669–674. Bibcode:1991Natur.350..669P. doi:10.1038/350669a0. S2CID 4267587. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2010.
 Worm, B.; Duffy, J. E. (2003). "Biodiversity, productivity and stability in real food webs". Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 18 (12): 628–632. Bibcode:2003TEcoE..18..628W. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.322.7255. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2003.09.003.
 McCann, K. (2007). "Protecting biostructure". Nature. 446 (7131): 29. Bibcode:2007Natur.446...29M. doi:10.1038/446029a. PMID 17330028. S2CID 4428058.
 Wilbur, H. W. (1997). "Experimental ecology of food webs: Complex systems in temporary ponds" (PDF). Ecology. 78 (8): 2279–2302. doi:10.1890/0012-9658(1997)078[2279:EEOFWC]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9658. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2011. Retrieved 27 November 2010.
 Emmerson, M.; Yearsley, J. M. (2004). "Weak interactions, omnivory and emergent food-web properties" (PDF). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 271 (1537): 397–405. doi:10.1098/rspb.2003.2592. PMC 1691599. PMID 15101699. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 June 2011.
 Krause, A. E.; Frank, K. A.; Mason, D. M.; Ulanowicz, R. E.; Taylor, W. W. (2003). "Compartments revealed in food-web structure" (PDF). Nature. 426 (6964): 282–285. Bibcode:2003Natur.426..282K. doi:10.1038/nature02115. hdl:2027.42/62960. PMID 14628050. S2CID 1752696. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 August 2011. Retrieved 4 June 2011.
 Egerton, Frank N. (2007). "Understanding food chains and food webs, 1700–1970". Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America. 88: 50–69. doi:10.1890/0012-9623(2007)88[50:UFCAFW]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9623.
 Shurin, J. B.; Gruner, D. S.; Hillebrand, H. (2006). "All wet or dried up? Real differences between aquatic and terrestrial food webs". Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 273 (1582): 1–9. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3377. PMC 1560001. PMID 16519227.
 Edwards, J.; Fraser, K. (1983). "Concept maps as reflectors of conceptual understanding". Research in Science Education. 13 (1): 19–26. Bibcode:1983RScEd..13...19E. doi:10.1007/BF02356689. S2CID 144922522.
 Gaynor, Kaitlyn M. (26 January 2024). "A big-headed problem drives an ecological chain reaction". Science. 383 (6681): 370–371. Bibcode:2024Sci...383..370G. doi:10.1126/science.adn3484. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 38271504.
 Kamaru, Douglas N.; Palmer, Todd M.; Riginos, Corinna; Ford, Adam T.; Belnap, Jayne; Chira, Robert M.; Githaiga, John M.; Gituku, Benard C.; Hays, Brandon R.; Kavwele, Cyrus M.; Kibungei, Alfred K.; Lamb, Clayton T.; Maiyo, Nelly J.; Milligan, Patrick D.; Mutisya, Samuel (26 January 2024). "Disruption of an ant-plant mutualism shapes interactions between lions and their primary prey". Science. 383 (6681): 433–438. Bibcode:2024Sci...383..433K. doi:10.1126/science.adg1464. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 38271503.
 Hairston, N. G. Jr.; Hairston, N. G. Sr. (1993). "Cause-effect relationships in energy flow, trophic structure, and interspecific interactions" (PDF). The American Naturalist. 142 (3): 379–411. Bibcode:1993ANat..142..379H. doi:10.1086/285546. hdl:1813/57238. S2CID 55279332. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2011.
 Duffy, J. Emmett; Cardinale, Bradley J.; France, Kristin E.; McIntyre, Peter B.; Thébault, Elisa; Loreau, Michel (2007). "The functional role of biodiversity in ecosystems: incorporating trophic complexity". Ecology Letters. 10 (6): 522–538. Bibcode:2007EcolL..10..522D. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2007.01037.x. PMID 17498151. Archived from the original on 5 March 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2019.
 Elton, C. S. (1927). Animal Ecology. London: Sidgwick and Jackson. ISBN 0-226-20639-4.
 Davic, R. D. (2003). "Linking keystone species and functional groups: a new operational definition of the keystone species concept" (PDF). Conservation Ecology. 7 (1): r11. doi:10.5751/ES-00502-0701r11. hdl:10535/2966. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 24 September 2019.
 Oksanen, L. (1991). "Trophic levels and trophic dynamics: A consensus emerging?". Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 6 (2): 58–60. Bibcode:1991TEcoE...6...58O. doi:10.1016/0169-5347(91)90124-G. PMID 21232425.
 Loehle, C.; Pechmann, Joseph H. K. (1988). "Evolution: The missing ingredient in systems ecology". The American Naturalist. 132 (9): 884–899. Bibcode:1988ANat..132..884L. doi:10.1086/284895. JSTOR 2462267. S2CID 85120393.
 Ulanowicz, R. E.; Kemp, W. Michael (1979). "Toward canonical trophic aggregations" (PDF). The American Naturalist. 114 (6): 871–883. Bibcode:1979ANat..114..871U. doi:10.1086/283534. hdl:1834/19829. JSTOR 2460557. S2CID 85371147. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2019.
 Li, B. (2000). "Why is the holistic approach becoming so important in landscape ecology?". Landscape and Urban Planning. 50 (1–3): 27–41. Bibcode:2000LUrbP..50...27L. doi:10.1016/S0169-2046(00)00078-5.
 Polis, G. A.; Strong, D. R. (1996). "Food web complexity and community dynamics" (PDF). The American Naturalist. 147 (5): 813–846. Bibcode:1996ANat..147..813P. doi:10.1086/285880. S2CID 85155900. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2011.
 Thompson, R. M.; Hemberg, M.; Starzomski, B. M.; Shurin, J. B. (2007). "Trophic levels and trophic tangles: The prevalence of omnivory in real food webs" (PDF). Ecology. 88 (3): 612–617. Bibcode:2007Ecol...88..612T. doi:10.1890/05-1454. PMID 17503589. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2011.
 Fischer, J.; Lindenmayer, D. B.; Manning, A. D. (2006). "Biodiversity, ecosystem function, and resilience: ten guiding principles for commodity production landscapes" (PDF). Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 4 (2): 80–86. doi:10.1890/1540-9295(2006)004[0080:BEFART]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 1540-9295. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
 Libralato, S.; Christensen, V.; Pauly, D. (2006). "A method for identifying keystone species in food web models" (PDF). Ecological Modelling. 195 (3–4): 153–171. Bibcode:2006EcMod.195..153L. doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2005.11.029. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2012.
 Paine, R. T. (January 1969). "A Note on Trophic Complexity and Community Stability". The American Naturalist. 103 (929): 91–93. Bibcode:1969ANat..103...91P. doi:10.1086/282586. ISSN 0003-0147. S2CID 83780992.
 Mills, L. S.; Soule, M. E.; Doak, D. F. (1993). "The keystone-species concept in ecology and conservation". BioScience. 43 (4): 219–224. doi:10.2307/1312122. JSTOR 1312122. S2CID 85204808.
 Anderson, P. K. (1995). "Competition, predation, and the evolution and extinction of Steller's sea cow, Hydrodamalis gigas". Marine Mammal Science. 11 (3): 391–394. Bibcode:1995MMamS..11..391A. doi:10.1111/j.1748-7692.1995.tb00294.x.
 Polis, G. A.; Sears, Anna L. W.; Huxel, Gary R.; Strong, Donald R.; Maron, John (2000). "When is a trophic cascade a trophic cascade?" (PDF). Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 15 (11): 473–475. Bibcode:2000TEcoE..15..473P. doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(00)01971-6. PMID 11050351. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2009.
 Novikoff, A. B. (1945). "The concept of integrative levels and biology" (PDF). Science. 101 (2618): 209–215. Bibcode:1945Sci...101..209N. doi:10.1126/science.101.2618.209. PMID 17814095. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 May 2011.
 Schneider, D. D. (2001). "The rise of the concept of scale in ecology" (PDF). BioScience. 51 (7): 545–553. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0545:TROTCO]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0006-3568. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016.
 Molnar, J.; Marvier, M.; Kareiva, P. (2004). "The sum is greater than the parts". Conservation Biology. 18 (6): 1670–1671. Bibcode:2004ConBi..18.1670M. doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.2004.00l07.x. S2CID 40349801.
 Loehle, C. (2004). "Challenges of ecological complexity". Ecological Complexity. 1 (1): 3–6. Bibcode:2004EcoCm...1....3.. doi:10.1016/j.ecocom.2003.09.001.
 Odum, E. P. (1977). "The emergence of ecology as a new integrative discipline". Science. 195 (4284): 1289–1293. Bibcode:1977Sci...195.1289O. doi:10.1126/science.195.4284.1289. PMID 17738398. S2CID 36862823.
 Scheffer, M.; Carpenter, S.; Foley, J. A.; Walker, B.; Walker, B. (2001). "Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems" (PDF). Nature. 413 (6856): 591–596. Bibcode:2001Natur.413..591S. doi:10.1038/35098000. PMID 11595939. S2CID 8001853. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 4 June 2011.
 "Welcome to ILTER". International Long Term Ecological Research. Archived from the original on 5 March 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2010.
 Silverton, Jonathan; Poulton, Paul; Johnston, Edward; Edwards, Grant; Heard, Matthew; Biss, Pamela M. (2006). "The Park Grass Experiment 1856–2006: Its contribution to ecology". Journal of Ecology. 94 (4): 801–814. Bibcode:2006JEcol..94..801S. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2745.2006.01145.x.
 "Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study Front Page". Archived from the original on 24 March 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2010.
 Liu, J.; Dietz, Thomas; Carpenter, Stephen R.; Folke, Carl; Alberti, Marina; Redman, Charles L.; Schneider, Stephen H.; Ostrom, Elinor; Pell, Alice N.; et al. (2009). "Coupled human and natural systems" (PDF). Ambio: A Journal of the Human Environment. 36 (8): 639–649. doi:10.1579/0044-7447(2007)36[639:CHANS]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0044-7447. PMID 18240679. S2CID 18167083. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 August 2011.
 Mikkelson, G. M. (2010). "Part-whole relationships and the unity of ecology" (PDF). In Skipper, R. A.; Allen, C.; Ankeny, R.; Craver, C. F.; Darden, L.; Richardson, R.C. (eds.). Philosophy Across the Life Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 September 2010.
 Wilson, D. S. (1988). "Holism and reductionism in evolutionary ecology". Oikos. 53 (2): 269–273. Bibcode:1988Oikos..53..269W. doi:10.2307/3566073. JSTOR 3566073.
 Miles, D. B.; Dunham, A. E. (1993). "Historical perspectives in ecology and evolutionary biology: The use of phylogenetic comparative analyses". Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 24 (1): 587–619. Bibcode:1993AnRES..24..587M. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.24.110193.003103.
 Craze, P., ed. (2 August 2012). "Trends in Ecology and Evolution". Cell Press, Elsevier, Inc. Archived from the original on 24 July 2009. Retrieved 9 December 2009.
 Allee, W. C.; Park, O.; Emerson, A. E.; Park, T.; Schmidt, K. P. (1949). Principles of Animal Ecology. W. B. Sunders, Co. p. 837. ISBN 0-7216-1120-6.
 Rickleffs, Robert E. (1996). The Economy of Nature. University of Chicago Press. p. 678. ISBN 0-7167-3847-3.
 Yoshida, T (2003). "Rapid evolution drives ecological dynamics in a predator–prey system". Nature. 424 (6946). Nature Publishing Group: 303–306. Bibcode:2003Natur.424..303Y. doi:10.1038/nature01767. PMID 12867979. S2CID 4425455.
 Stuart-Fox, D.; Moussalli, A. (2008). "Selection for social signalling drives the evolution of chameleon colour change". PLOS Biology. 6 (1): e25. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060025. PMC 2214820. PMID 18232740.
 Karban, R. (2008). "Plant behaviour and communication". Ecology Letters. 11 (7): 727–739. Bibcode:2008EcolL..11..727K. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2008.01183.x. PMID 18400016.
 Tinbergen, N. (1963). "On aims and methods of ethology" (PDF). Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie. 20 (4): 410–433. Bibcode:1963Ethol..20..410T. doi:10.1111/j.1439-0310.1963.tb01161.x. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2011.
 Hamner, W. M. (1985). "The importance of ethology for investigations of marine zooplankton". Bulletin of Marine Science. 37 (2): 414–424. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011.
 Strassmann, J. E.; Zhu, Y.; Queller, D. C. (2000). "Altruism and social cheating in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum". Nature. 408 (6815): 965–967. Bibcode:2000Natur.408..965S. doi:10.1038/35050087. PMID 11140681. S2CID 4307980.
 Sakurai, K. (1985). "An attelabid weevil (Euops splendida) cultivates fungi". Journal of Ethology. 3 (2): 151–156. doi:10.1007/BF02350306. S2CID 30261494.
 Anderson, J. D. (1961). "The courtship behaviour of Ambystoma macrodactylum croceum". Copeia. 1961 (2): 132–139. doi:10.2307/1439987. JSTOR 1439987.
 "Behavioral Ecology". International Society for Behavioral Ecology. Archived from the original on 10 April 2011. Retrieved 15 April 2011.
 Gould, Stephen J.; Vrba, Elizabeth S. (1982). "Exaptation – a missing term in the science of form". Paleobiology. 8 (1): 4–15. Bibcode:1982Pbio....8....4G. doi:10.1017/S0094837300004310. S2CID 86436132.
 Wilson, Edward. O. (2000). Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (25th anniversary ed.). President and Fellows of Harvard College. ISBN 978-0-674-00089-6. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Eastwood, R. (2004). "Successive replacement of tending ant species at aggregations of scale insects (Hemiptera: Margarodidae and Eriococcidae) on Eucalyptus in south-east Queensland" (PDF). Australian Journal of Entomology. 43: 1–4. doi:10.1111/j.1440-6055.2003.00371.x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 September 2011.
 Ives, A. R.; Cardinale, B. J.; Snyder, W. E. (2004). "A synthesis of subdisciplines: Predator–prey interactions, and biodiversity and ecosystem functioning". Ecology Letters. 8 (1): 102–116. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2004.00698.x.
 Krebs, J. R.; Davies, N. B. (1993). An Introduction to Behavioural Ecology. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 432. ISBN 978-0-632-03546-5. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Webb, J. K.; Pike, D. A.; Shine, R. (2010). "Olfactory recognition of predators by nocturnal lizards: safety outweighs thermal benefits". Behavioral Ecology. 21 (1): 72–77. doi:10.1093/beheco/arp152. S2CID 52043639.
 Cooper, W. E.; Frederick, W. G. (2010). "Predator lethality, optimal escape behavior, and autotomy". Behavioral Ecology. 21 (1): 91–96. doi:10.1093/beheco/arp151.
 Kodric-Brown, A.; Brown, J. H. (1984). "Truth in advertising: The kinds of traits favored by sexual selection" (PDF). The American Naturalist. 124 (3): 309–323. Bibcode:1984ANat..124..309K. doi:10.1086/284275. S2CID 28245687. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 June 2011.
 Adrian G Palacios, Francisco Bozinovic; Bozinovic (2003). "An "enactive" approach to integrative and comparative biology: Thoughts on the table". Biology Research. 36 (1): 95–99. doi:10.4067/S0716-97602003000100008. PMID 12795209.
 Reuven Dukas (1998). "§1.3 Why study cognitive ecology?". In Reuven Dukas (ed.). Cognitive Ecology: The Evolutionary Ecology of Information Processing and Decision Making. University of Chicago Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-226-16932-3. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Reuven Dukas; John M. Ratcliffe (2009). "Introduction". In Reuven Dukas; John M. Ratcliffe (eds.). Cognitive Ecology II. University of Chicago Press. pp. 1 ff. ISBN 978-0-226-16937-8. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015. Cognitive ecology focuses on the ecology and evolution of "cognition" defined as the neuronal processes concerned with the acquisition, retention, and use of information....we ought to rely on ecological and evolutionary knowledge for studying cognition.
 Francisco J Varela; Evan Thompson; Eleanor Rosch (1993). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience. MIT Press. p. 174. ISBN 978-0-262-26123-4. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Sherman, P. W.; Lacey, E. A.; Reeve, H. K.; Keller, L. (1995). "The eusociality continuum" (PDF). Behavioral Ecology. 6 (1): 102–108. doi:10.1093/beheco/6.1.102. PMID 21237927. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011.
 Wilson, D. S.; Wilson, E. O. (2007). "Rethinking the theoretical foundation of sociobiology". The Quarterly Review of Biology. 82 (4): 327–348. doi:10.1086/522809. PMID 18217526. S2CID 37774648.
 Page, R. D. M. (1991). "Clocks, clades, and cospeciation: Comparing rates of evolution and timing of cospeciation events in host-parasite assemblages". Systematic Zoology. 40 (2): 188–198. doi:10.2307/2992256. JSTOR 2992256.
 Herre, E. A.; Knowlton, N.; Mueller, U. G.; Rehner, S. A. (1999). "The evolution of mutualisms: exploring the paths between conflict and cooperation" (PDF). Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 14 (2): 49–53. doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(98)01529-8. PMID 10234251. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2009.
 Gilbert, F. S. (1990). Insect life cycles: Genetics, evolution, and co-ordination. New York: Springer-Verlag. p. 258. ISBN 0-387-19550-5. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 6 January 2020.
 Kiers, E. T.; van der Heijden, M. G. A. (2006). "Mutualistic stability in the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis: Exploring hypotheses of evolutionary cooperation" (PDF). Ecology. 87 (7): 1627–1636. doi:10.1890/0012-9658(2006)87[1627:MSITAM]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9658. PMID 16922314. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 October 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2009.
 Strain, B. R. (1985). "Physiological and ecological controls on carbon sequestering in terrestrial ecosystems". Biogeochemistry. 1 (3): 219–232. Bibcode:1985Biogc...1..219S. doi:10.1007/BF02187200. S2CID 98479424.
 Bronstein, J. L. (2018). "The exploitation of mutualisms". Ecology Letters. 4 (3): 277–287. doi:10.1046/j.1461-0248.2001.00218.x.
 Irwin, Rebecca E.; Bronstein, Judith L.; Manson, Jessamyn S.; Richardson, Leif (2010). "Nectar robbing: Ecological and evolutionary perspectives". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 41 (2): 271–292. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.110308.120330.
 Boucher, D. H.; James, S.; Keeler, K. H. (1982). "The ecology of mutualism". Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 13 (1): 315–347. Bibcode:1982AnRES..13..315B. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.13.110182.001531. S2CID 33027458.
 King, K. C.; Delph, L. F.; Jokela, J.; Lively, C. M. (2009). "The geographic mosaic of sex and the Red Queen". Current Biology. 19 (17): 1438–1441. Bibcode:2009CBio...19.1438K. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.062. PMID 19631541. S2CID 12027050.
 Parenti, L. R.; Ebach, M. C. (2009). Comparative Biogeography: Discovering and Classifying Biogeographical Patterns of a Dynamic Earth. London: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25945-4. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 "Journal of Biogeography – Overview". Wiley. doi:10.1111/(ISSN)1365-2699. Archived from the original on 9 February 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2018.
 MacArthur, R.; Wilson, E. O. (1967). The Theory of Island Biogeography. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 Wiens, J. J.; Donoghue, M. J. (2004). "Historical biogeography, ecology and species richness" (PDF). Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 19 (12): 639–644. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2004.09.011. PMID 16701326. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010.
 Morrone, J. J.; Crisci, J. V. (1995). "Historical biogeography: Introduction to methods". Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 26 (1): 373–401. Bibcode:1995AnRES..26..373M. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.26.110195.002105. S2CID 55258511.
 Svenning, Jens-Christian; Condi, R. (2008). "Biodiversity in a warmer world". Science. 322 (5899): 206–207. doi:10.1126/science.1164542. PMID 18845738. S2CID 27131917.
 Landhäusser, Simon M.; Deshaies, D.; Lieffers, V. J. (2009). "Disturbance facilitates rapid range expansion of aspen into higher elevations of the Rocky Mountains under a warming climate". Journal of Biogeography. 37 (1): 68–76. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2699.2009.02182.x. S2CID 82859453.
 Reznick, D.; Bryant, M. J.; Bashey, F. (2002). "r- and K-selection revisited: The role of population regulation in life-history evolution" (PDF). Ecology. 83 (6): 1509–1520. doi:10.1890/0012-9658(2002)083[1509:RAKSRT]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9658. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 December 2010. Retrieved 27 January 2010.
 Pianka, E. R. (1972). "r and K Selection or b and d Selection?". The American Naturalist. 106 (951): 581–588. Bibcode:1972ANat..106..581P. doi:10.1086/282798. S2CID 83947445.
 Rieseberg, L. (ed.). "Molecular Ecology". Molecular Ecology. Wiley. doi:10.1111/(ISSN)1365-294X.
 Avise, J. (1994). Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution. Kluwer Academic Publishers. ISBN 0-412-03771-8. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 O'Brian, E.; Dawson, R. (2007). "Context-dependent genetic benefits of extra-pair mate choice in a socially monogamous passerine" (PDF). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 61 (5): 775–782. Bibcode:2007BEcoS..61..775O. doi:10.1007/s00265-006-0308-8. S2CID 2040456. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 July 2011.
 Avise, J. (2000). Phylogeography: The History and Formation of Species. President and Fellows of Harvard College. ISBN 0-674-66638-0. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Rachel Carson (1962). ""Silent Spring" (excerpt)". Houghton Mifflin. Archived from the original on 14 October 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2012.
 Young, G. L. (1974). "Human ecology as an interdisciplinary concept: A critical inquiry". Advances in Ecological Research Volume 8. Vol. 8. pp. 1–105. doi:10.1016/S0065-2504(08)60277-9. ISBN 978-0-12-013908-8.
 Gross, M. (2004). "Human geography and ecological sociology: the unfolding of human ecology, 1890 to 1930 – and beyond". Social Science History. 28 (4): 575–605. doi:10.1017/S0145553200012852. S2CID 233365777.
 "Millennium Ecosystem Assessment – Synthesis Report". United Nations. 2005. Archived from the original on 4 February 2010. Retrieved 4 February 2010.
 de Groot, R. S.; Wilson, M. A.; Boumans, R. M. J. (2002). "A typology for the classification, description and valuation of ecosystem functions, goods and services" (PDF). Ecological Economics. 41 (3): 393–408. Bibcode:2002EcoEc..41..393D. doi:10.1016/S0921-8009(02)00089-7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2011.
 Aguirre, A. A. (2009). "Biodiversity and human health". EcoHealth. 6: 153–156. doi:10.1007/s10393-009-0242-0. S2CID 27553272.
 Grumbine, R. E. (1994). "What is ecosystem management?" (PDF). Conservation Biology. 8 (1): 27–38. Bibcode:1994ConBi...8...27G. doi:10.1046/j.1523-1739.1994.08010027.x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2013.
 Wilson, E. O. (1992). The Diversity of Life. Harvard University Press. p. 440. ISBN 978-0-674-05817-0.
 "Boston Wetlands Ordinance". City of Boston. 17 July 2016. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2022.
 Slocombe, D. S. (1993). "Implementing ecosystem-based management". BioScience. 43 (9): 612–622. doi:10.2307/1312148. JSTOR 1312148.
 Hobss, R. J.; Harris, J. A. (2001). "Restoration ecology: Repairing the Earth's ecosystems in the new millennium" (PDF). Restoration Ecology. 9 (2): 239–246. Bibcode:2001ResEc...9..239H. doi:10.1046/j.1526-100x.2001.009002239.x. S2CID 908668. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2013.
 Mason, H. L.; Langenheim, J. H. (1957). "Language analysis and the concept "environment"". Ecology. 38 (2): 325–340. Bibcode:1957Ecol...38..325M. doi:10.2307/1931693. JSTOR 1931693.
 Kleese, D. A. (2001). "Nature and nature in Psychology". Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology. 21: 61–79. doi:10.1037/h0091199.
 Campbell, Neil A.; Williamson, Brad; Heyden, Robin J. (2006). Biology: Exploring Life. Boston, Massachusetts: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-250882-6. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014.
 Kormondy, E. E. (1995). Concepts of Ecology (4th ed.). Benjamin Cummings. ISBN 0-13-478116-3.
 Hughes, A. R. "Disturbance and diversity: an ecological chicken and egg problem". Nature Education Knowledge. 1 (8): 26. Archived from the original on 5 December 2010.
 Levin, S. A. (1992). "The problem of pattern and scale in ecology: The Robert H. MacArthur Award". Ecology. 73 (6): 1943–1967. doi:10.2307/1941447. JSTOR 1941447.
 Holling, C. S. (1973). "Resilience and stability of ecological systems" (PDF). Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 4 (1): 1–23. Bibcode:1973AnRES...4....1H. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.04.110173.000245. JSTOR 2096802. S2CID 53309505. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 March 2020. Retrieved 10 August 2019.
 Folke, C.; Carpenter, S.; Walker, B.; Scheffer, M.; Elmqvist, T.; Gunderson, L.; Holling, C.S. (2004). "Regime shifts, resilience, and biodiversity in ecosystem management" (PDF). Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 35: 557–581. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.489.8717. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.35.021103.105711. JSTOR 2096802. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 October 2012.
 Roth, Lachan; Eviatar, Gal; Schmidt, Lisa-Maria; Bonomo, Mai; Feldstein-Farkash, Tamar; Schubert, Patrick; Ziegler, Maren; Al-Sawalmih, Ali; Abdallah, Ibrahim Souleiman; Quod, Jean-Pascal; Bronstein, Omri (May 2024). "Mass mortality of diadematoid sea urchins in the Red Sea and Western Indian Ocean". Current Biology. 34 (12): 2693–2701.e4. Bibcode:2024CBio...34.2693R. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2024.04.057. PMID 38788707.
 Zimmer, Katarina (30 May 2024). "Invasive species are transforming the Everglades". Knowable Magazine. doi:10.1146/knowable-053024-2.
 Morgan Ernest, S. K.; Enquist, Brian J.; Brown, James H.; Charnov, Eric L.; Gillooly, James F.; Savage, Van M.; White, Ethan P.; Smith, Felisa A.; Hadly, Elizabeth A.; Haskell, John P.; Lyons, S. Kathleen; Maurer, Brian A.; Niklas, Karl J.; Tiffney, Bruce (2003). "Thermodynamic and metabolic effects on the scaling of production and population energy use" (PDF). Ecology Letters. 6 (11): 990–995. Bibcode:2003EcolL...6..990E. doi:10.1046/j.1461-0248.2003.00526.x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2009.
 Allègre, Claude J.; Manhès, Gérard; Göpel, Christa (1995). "The age of the Earth". Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta. 59 (8): 1455–1456. Bibcode:1995GeCoA..59.1445A. doi:10.1016/0016-7037(95)00054-4.
 Wills, C.; Bada, J. (2001). The Spark of Life: Darwin and the Primeval Soup. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7382-0493-2.
 Goldblatt, Colin; Lenton, Timothy M.; Watson, Andrew J. (2006). "Bistability of atmospheric oxygen and the Great Oxidation" (PDF). Nature. 443 (7112): 683–686. Bibcode:2006Natur.443..683G. doi:10.1038/nature05169. PMID 17036001. S2CID 4425486. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2011.
 Catling, D. C.; Claire, M. W. (2005). "How Earth's atmosphere evolved to an oxic state: A status report" (PDF). Earth and Planetary Science Letters. 237 (1–2): 1–20. Bibcode:2005E&PSL.237....1C. doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2005.06.013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2008. Retrieved 6 September 2009.
 Cronk, J. K.; Fennessy, M. S. (2001). Wetland Plants: Biology and Ecology. Washington, D.C.: Lewis Publishers. ISBN 1-56670-372-7. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Evans, D. H.; Piermarini, P. M.; Potts, W. T. W. (1999). "Ionic transport in the fish gill epithelium" (PDF). Journal of Experimental Zoology. 283 (7): 641–652. Bibcode:1999JEZ...283..641E. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-010X(19990601)283:7<641::AID-JEZ3>3.0.CO;2-W. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2010. Retrieved 9 December 2009.
 Swenson, N. G.; Enquist, B. J. (2008). "The relationship between stem and branch wood specific gravity and the ability of each measure to predict leaf area". American Journal of Botany. 95 (4): 516–519. Bibcode:2008AmJB...95..516S. doi:10.3732/ajb.95.4.516. PMID 21632377. S2CID 429191.
 Gartner, Gabriel E.A.; Hicks, James W.; Manzani, Paulo R.; et al. (2010). "Phylogeny, ecology, and heart position in snakes" (PDF). Physiological and Biochemical Zoology. 83 (1): 43–54. doi:10.1086/648509. hdl:11449/21150. PMID 19968564. S2CID 16332609. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011.
 Neri Salvadori; Pasquale Commendatore; Massimo Tamberi (14 May 2014). Geography, structural Change and Economic Development: Theory and Empirics. Edward Elgar Publishing.
 Jacobsen, D. (2008). "Low oxygen pressure as a driving factor for the altitudinal decline in taxon richness of stream macroinvertebrates". Oecologia. 154 (4): 795–807. Bibcode:2008Oecol.154..795J. doi:10.1007/s00442-007-0877-x. PMID 17960424. S2CID 484645.
 Wheeler, T. D.; Stroock, A. D. (2008). "The transpiration of water at negative pressures in a synthetic tree". Nature. 455 (7210): 208–212. Bibcode:2008Natur.455..208W. doi:10.1038/nature07226. PMID 18784721. S2CID 4404849.
 Pockman, W. T.; Sperry, J. S.; O'Leary, J. W. (1995). "Sustained and significant negative water pressure in xylem". Nature. 378 (6558): 715–716. Bibcode:1995Natur.378..715P. doi:10.1038/378715a0. S2CID 31357329.
 Zimmermann, U.; Schneider, H.; Wegner, L. H.; Wagner, M.; Szimtenings, A.; Haase, F.; Bentrup, F. W. (2002). "What are the driving forces for water lifting in the xylem conduit?". Physiologia Plantarum. 114 (3): 327–335. Bibcode:2002PPlan.114..327Z. doi:10.1034/j.1399-3054.2002.1140301.x. PMID 12060254.
 Kastak, D.; Schusterman, R. J. (1998). "Low-frequency amphibious hearing in pinnipeds: Methods, measurements, noise, and ecology". Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 103 (4): 2216–2228. Bibcode:1998ASAJ..103.2216K. doi:10.1121/1.421367. PMID 9566340. S2CID 19008897.
 Nishiguchi, Y.; Ito, I.; Okada, M. (2010). "Structure and function of lactate dehydrogenase from hagfish". Marine Drugs. 8 (3): 594–607. doi:10.3390/md8030594. PMC 2857353. PMID 20411117.
 Friedman, J.; Harder, L. D. (2004). "Inflorescence architecture and wind pollination in six grass species" (PDF). Functional Ecology. 18 (6): 851–860. Bibcode:2004FuEco..18..851F. doi:10.1111/j.0269-8463.2004.00921.x. S2CID 20160390. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011.
 Harder, L. D.; Johnson, S. D. (2009). "Darwin's beautiful contrivances: evolutionary and functional evidence for floral adaptation". New Phytologist. 183 (3): 530–545. Bibcode:2009NewPh.183..530H. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02914.x. PMID 19552694.
 Shimeta, J.; Jumars, P. A.; Lessard, E. J. (1995). "Influences of turbulence on suspension feeding by planktonic protozoa; experiments in laminar shear fields". Limnology and Oceanography. 40 (5): 845–859. Bibcode:1995LimOc..40..845S. doi:10.4319/lo.1995.40.5.0845.
 Etemad-Shahidi, A.; Imberger, J. (2001). "Anatomy of turbulence in thermally stratified lakes". Limnology and Oceanography. 46 (5): 1158–1170. Bibcode:2001LimOc..46.1158E. doi:10.4319/lo.2001.46.5.1158.
 Wolf, B. O.; Walsberg, G. E. (2006). "Thermal effects of radiation and wind on a small bird and implications for microsite selection". Ecology. 77 (7): 2228–2236. doi:10.2307/2265716. JSTOR 2265716.
 Daubenmire, R. (1975). "Floristic plant geography of eastern Washington and northern Idaho". Journal of Biogeography. 2 (1): 1–18. Bibcode:1975JBiog...2....1D. doi:10.2307/3038197. JSTOR 3038197.
 Steele, C. A.; Carstens, B. C.; Storfer, A.; Sullivan, J. (2005). "Testing hypotheses of speciation timing in Dicamptodon copei and Dicamptodon aterrimus (Caudata: Dicamptodontidae)" (PDF). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 36 (1): 90–100. Bibcode:2005MolPE..36...90S. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2004.12.001. PMID 15904859. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 August 2010.
 Lenton, T. M.; Watson, A. (2000). "Redfield revisited. 2. What regulates the oxygen content of the atmosphere". Global Biogeochemical Cycles. 14 (1): 249–268. Bibcode:2000GBioC..14..249L. doi:10.1029/1999GB900076.
 Lobert, J. M.; Warnatz, J. (1993). "Emissions from the combustion process in vegetation" (PDF). In Crutzen, P. J.; Goldammer, J. G. (eds.). Fire in the Environment: The Ecological, Atmospheric and Climatic Importance of Vegetation Fires. Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-93604-6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2009. Retrieved 11 December 2009.
 Garren, K. H. (1943). "Effects of fire on vegetation of the southeastern United States". Botanical Review. 9 (9): 617–654. Bibcode:1943BotRv...9..617G. doi:10.1007/BF02872506. S2CID 31619796.
 Cooper, C. F. (1960). "Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern pine forests since white settlement". Ecological Monographs. 30 (2): 130–164. Bibcode:1960EcoM...30..129C. doi:10.2307/1948549. JSTOR 1948549.
 Cooper, C. F. (1961). "The ecology of fire". Scientific American. 204 (4): 150–160. Bibcode:1961SciAm.204d.150C. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0461-150.
 van Wagtendonk, Jan W. (2007). "History and evolution of wildland fire use". Fire Ecology. 3 (2): 3–17. Bibcode:2007FiEco...3b...3V. doi:10.4996/fireecology.0302003. S2CID 85841606.
 Boerner, R. E. J. (1982). "Fire and nutrient cycling in temperate ecosystems". BioScience. 32 (3): 187–192. doi:10.2307/1308941. JSTOR 1308941.
 Goubitz, S.; Werger, M. J. A.; Ne'eman, G. (2009). "Germination response to fire-related factors of seeds from non-serotinous and serotinous cones". Plant Ecology. 169 (2): 195–204. doi:10.1023/A:1026036332277. S2CID 32500454.
 Ne'eman, G.; Goubitz, S.; Nathan, R. (2004). "Reproductive traits of Pinus halepensis in the light of fire: a critical review". Plant Ecology. 171 (1/2): 69–79. Bibcode:2004PlEco.171...69N. doi:10.1023/B:VEGE.0000029380.04821.99. S2CID 24962708.
 Flematti, Gavin R.; Ghisalberti, Emilio L.; Dixon, Kingsley W.; Trengove, R. D. (2004). "A compound from smoke that promotes seed germination". Science. 305 (5686): 977. doi:10.1126/science.1099944. PMID 15247439. S2CID 42979006.
 Coleman, D. C.; Corssley, D. A.; Hendrix, P. F. (2004). Fundamentals of Soil Ecology (2nd ed.). Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-179726-0. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
 Wilkinson, M. T.; Richards, P. J.; Humphreys, G. S. (2009). "Breaking ground: Pedological, geological, and ecological implications of soil bioturbation" (PDF). Earth-Science Reviews. 97 (1–4): 257–272. Bibcode:2009ESRv...97..257W. doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2009.09.005. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2012.
 Phillips, J. D. (2009). "Soils as extended composite phenotypes". Geoderma. 149 (1–2): 143–151. Bibcode:2009Geode.149..143P. doi:10.1016/j.geoderma.2008.11.028.
 Reinhardt, L.; Jerolmack, D.; Cardinale, B. J.; Vanacker, V.; Wright, J. (2010). "Dynamic interactions of life and its landscape: Feedbacks at the interface of geomorphology and ecology" (PDF). Earth Surface Processes and Landforms. 35 (1): 78–101. Bibcode:2010ESPL...35...78R. doi:10.1002/esp.1912. S2CID 14924423. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 2 January 2015.
 Davic, R. D.; Welsh, H. H. (2004). "On the ecological role of salamanders" (PDF). Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 35: 405–434. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.35.112202.130116. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 August 2009.
 Hasiotis, S. T. (2003). "Complex ichnofossils of solitary and social soil organisms: Understanding their evolution and roles in terrestrial paleoecosystems". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology. 192 (2): 259–320. Bibcode:2003PPP...192..259H. doi:10.1016/S0031-0182(02)00689-2.
 Falkowski, P. G.; Fenchel, T.; Delong, E. F. (2008). "The microbial engines that drive Earth's biogeochemical cycles" (PDF). Science. 320 (5879): 1034–1039. Bibcode:2008Sci...320.1034F. doi:10.1126/science.1153213. PMID 18497287. S2CID 2844984. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2017.
 Grace, J. (2004). "Understanding and managing the global carbon cycle". Journal of Ecology. 92 (2): 189–202. Bibcode:2004JEcol..92..189G. doi:10.1111/j.0022-0477.2004.00874.x.
 Pearson, P. N.; Palmer, M. R. (2000). "Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations over the past 60 million years" (PDF). Nature. 406 (6797): 695–699. Bibcode:2000Natur.406..695P. doi:10.1038/35021000. PMID 10963587. S2CID 205008176. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 August 2011.
 Pagani, M.; Zachos, J. C.; Freeman, K. H.; Tipple, B.; Bohaty, S. (2005). "Marked decline in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations during the Paleogene". Science. 309 (5734): 600–603. Bibcode:2005Sci...309..600P. doi:10.1126/science.1110063. PMID 15961630. S2CID 20277445.
 Zhuan, Q.; Melillo, J. M.; McGuire, A. D.; Kicklighter, D. W.; Prinn, R. G.; Steudler, P. A.; Felzer, B. S.; Hu, S. (2007). "Net emission of CH4 and CO2 in Alaska: Implications for the region's greenhouse gas budget" (PDF). Ecological Applications. 17 (1): 203–212. doi:10.1890/1051-0761(2007)017[0203:NEOCAC]2.0.CO;2. hdl:1912/4714. ISSN 1051-0761. PMID 17479846. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 June 2007.
 Cox, Peter M.; Betts, Richard A.; Jones, Chris D.; Spall, Steven A.; Totterdell, Ian J. (2000). "Acceleration of global warming due to carbon-cycle feedbacks in a coupled climate model" (PDF). Nature. 408 (6809): 184–187. Bibcode:2000Natur.408..184C. doi:10.1038/35041539. PMID 11089968. S2CID 2689847. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 September 2012.
 Erwin, D. H. (2009). "Climate as a driver of evolutionary change". Current Biology. 19 (14): R575 – R583. Bibcode:2009CBio...19.R575E. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.05.047. PMID 19640496. S2CID 6913670.
 Bamber, J. (2012). "Shrinking glaciers under scrutiny" (PDF). Nature. 482 (7386): 482–483. Bibcode:2012Natur.482..482B. doi:10.1038/nature10948. PMID 22318516. S2CID 7311971. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 November 2021. Retrieved 12 June 2017.
 Heimann, Martin; Reichstein, Markus (2008). "Terrestrial ecosystem carbon dynamics and climate feedbacks" (PDF). Nature. 451 (7176): 289–292. Bibcode:2008Natur.451..289H. doi:10.1038/nature06591. PMID 18202646. S2CID 243073. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 June 2011.
 Davidson, Eric A.; Janssens, Ivan A. (2006). "Temperature sensitivity of soil carbon decomposition and feedbacks to climate change". Nature. 440 (7081): 165–173. Bibcode:2006Natur.440..165D. doi:10.1038/nature04514. PMID 16525463.
 Stauffer, R. C. (1957). "Haeckel, Darwin and ecology". The Quarterly Review of Biology. 32 (2): 138–144. doi:10.1086/401754. S2CID 84079279.
 Egerton, F. N. (2001). "A history of the ecological sciences: early Greek origins" (PDF). Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America. 82 (1): 93–97. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 August 2012. Retrieved 29 September 2010.
 Benson, Keith R. (2000). "The emergence of ecology from natural history". Endeavour. 24 (2): 59–62. doi:10.1016/S0160-9327(99)01260-0. PMID 10969480.
 Sober, E. (1980). "Evolution, population thinking, and essentialism". Philosophy of Science. 47 (3): 350–383. doi:10.1086/288942. JSTOR 186950. S2CID 170129617.
 Hughes, J. D. (1985). "Theophrastus as ecologist". Environmental Review. 9 (4): 296–306. doi:10.2307/3984460. JSTOR 3984460. S2CID 155638387.
 Hughes, J. D. (1975). "Ecology in ancient Greece". Inquiry. 18 (2): 115–125. doi:10.1080/00201747508601756.
 Forbes, S. (1887). "The lake as a microcosm" (PDF). Bulletin of the Scientific Association. Peoria, IL: 77–87. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2009.
 Kingsland, S. (2004). "Conveying the intellectual challenge of ecology: An historical perspective" (PDF). Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 2 (7): 367–374. doi:10.1890/1540-9295(2004)002[0367:CTICOE]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 1540-9295. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2011.
 Rosenzweig, M. L. (2003). "Reconciliation ecology and the future of species diversity". Oryx. 37 (2): 194–205. doi:10.1017/s0030605303000371. S2CID 37891678.
 Hawkins, B. A. (2001). "Ecology's oldest pattern". Endeavor. 25 (3): 133–134. doi:10.1016/S0160-9327(00)01369-7. PMID 11725309.
 McIntosh, R. P. (1985). The Background of Ecology: Concept and Theory. Cambridge University Press. p. 400. ISBN 0-521-27087-1.
 Haeckel, Ernst (1866). Generelle Morphologie der Organismen [The General Morphology of Organisms] (in German). Vol. 2. Berlin, (Germany): Georg Reimer. p. 286. Archived from the original on 18 June 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2019. From p. 286: "Unter Oecologie verstehen wir die gesammte Wissenschaft von den Beziehungen des Organismus zur umgebenden Aussenwelt, wohin wir im weiteren Sinne alle "Existenz-Bedingungen" rechnen können." (By "ecology" we understand the comprehensive science of the relationships of the organism to its surrounding environment, where we can include, in the broader sense, all "conditions of existence".)
 Friederichs, K. (1958). "A definition of ecology and some thoughts about basic concepts". Ecology. 39 (1): 154–159. Bibcode:1958Ecol...39..154F. doi:10.2307/1929981. JSTOR 1929981.
 Hinchman, L. P.; Hinchman, S. K. (2007). "What we owe the Romantics". Environmental Values. 16 (3): 333–354. Bibcode:2007EnvV...16..333H. doi:10.3197/096327107X228382. S2CID 143709995.
 Goodland, R. J. (1975). "The tropical origin of ecology: Eugen Warming's jubilee". Oikos. 26 (2): 240–245. Bibcode:1975Oikos..26..240G. doi:10.2307/3543715. JSTOR 3543715.
 Egerton, F. N. (2007). "A history of the ecological sciences, part 23: Linnaeus and the economy of nature". Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America. 88 (1): 72–88. doi:10.1890/0012-9623(2007)88[72:AHOTES]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9623.
 Kormandy, E. J.; Wooster, Donald (1978). "Review: Ecology/economy of nature – synonyms?". Ecology. 59 (6): 1292–1294. doi:10.2307/1938247. JSTOR 1938247.
 Hector, A.; Hooper, R. (2002). "Darwin and the first ecological experiment". Science. 295 (5555): 639–640. doi:10.1126/science.1064815. PMID 11809960. S2CID 82975886.
 Sinclair, G. (1826). "On cultivating a collection of grasses in pleasure-grounds or flower-gardens, and on the utility of studying the Gramineae". London Gardener's Magazine. Vol. 1. New-Street-Square: A. & R. Spottiswoode. p. 115. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
 May, R. (1999). "Unanswered questions in ecology". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 354 (1392): 1951–1959. doi:10.1098/rstb.1999.0534. PMC 1692702. PMID 10670015.
 Darwin, Charles (1859). On the Origin of Species. London: John Murray. p. 1. ISBN 0-8014-1319-2. Archived from the original on 13 July 2007.
 Meysman, F. J. R.; Middelburg, Jack J.; Heip, C. H. R. (2006). "Bioturbation: A fresh look at Darwin's last idea". Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 21 (22): 688–695. Bibcode:2006TEcoE..21..688M. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2006.08.002. PMID 16901581.
 Acot, P. (1997). "The Lamarckian cradle of scientific ecology". Acta Biotheoretica. 45 (3–4): 185–193. doi:10.1023/A:1000631103244. S2CID 83288244.
 Hunt, Caroline Louisa (1912). The life of Ellen H. Richards. Boston: Whitcomb & Barrows.
 Jones, Madison (8 August 2021). "A Counterhistory of Rhetorical Ecologies". Rhetoric Society Quarterly. 51 (4): 336–352. doi:10.1080/02773945.2021.1947517. ISSN 0277-3945. S2CID 238358762.
 Clements, F. E. (1905). Research methods in ecology. Lincoln, Neb.: University Pub. Comp. ISBN 0-405-10381-6. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 6 January 2020.
 Simberloff, D. (1980). "A succession of paradigms in ecology: Essentialism to materialism and probalism". Synthese. 43: 3–39. doi:10.1007/BF00413854. S2CID 46962930.
 Gleason, H. A. (1926). "The individualistic concept of the plant association" (PDF). Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club. 53 (1): 7–26. doi:10.2307/2479933. JSTOR 2479933. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2011.
 Foster, J. B.; Clark, B. (2008). "The sociology of ecology: ecological organicism versus ecosystem ecology in the social construction of ecological science, 1926–1935" (PDF). Organization & Environment. 21 (3): 311–352. doi:10.1177/1086026608321632. S2CID 145482219. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 May 2013.
 Allee, W. C. (1932). Animal Life and Social Growth. Baltimore: The Williams & Wilkins Company and Associates.
 Cook, R. E. (1977). "Raymond Lindeman and the trophic-dynamic concept in ecology" (PDF). Science. 198 (4312): 22–26. Bibcode:1977Sci...198...22C. doi:10.1126/science.198.4312.22. PMID 17741875. S2CID 30340899. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 October 2012.
 Odum, E. P. (1968). "Energy flow in ecosystems: A historical review". American Zoologist. 8 (1): 11–18. doi:10.1093/icb/8.1.11. JSTOR 3881528.
 Ghilarov, A. M. (1995). "Vernadsky's biosphere concept: an historical perspective". The Quarterly Review of Biology. 70 (2): 193–203. doi:10.1086/418982. JSTOR 3036242. S2CID 85258634.
 Itô, Y. (1991). "Development of ecology in Japan, with special reference to the role of Kinji Imanishi". Journal of Ecological Research. 6 (2): 139–155. Bibcode:1991EcoR....6..139I. doi:10.1007/BF02347158. S2CID 45293729.
 Carson, R. (2002). Silent Spring. Houghton Mifflin Company. p. 348. ISBN 0-618-24906-0.
 Palamar, C. R. (2008). "The justice of ecological restoration: Environmental history, health, ecology, and justice in the United States" (PDF). Human Ecology Review. 15 (1): 82–94. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
 Krebs, J. R.; Wilson, J. D.; Bradbury, R. B.; Siriwardena, G. M. (1999). "The second Silent Spring" (PDF). Nature. 400 (6745): 611–612. Bibcode:1999Natur.400..611K. doi:10.1038/23127. S2CID 9929695. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 March 2013.
External links
Ecology
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
"Ecology" entry by Alkistis Elliott-Graves in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
The Nature Education Knowledge Project: Ecology
vte
Elements of nature
vte
Branches of biology
vte
Biology
vte
Earth
vte
Environmental science
vte
Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Trophic components
vte
Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Other components
vte
Branches of ecology
Portals:
icon Environment
icon Ecology
Ecology at Wikipedia's sister projects:

Definitions from Wiktionary

Media from Commons

Quotations from Wikiquote

Textbooks from Wikibooks

Resources from Wikiversity
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: EcologyBiogeochemistryEcology terminologyEmergence
This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 10:41 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Ecology

178 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Introduction
Examples
Applications

Mechanical properties

Thermodynamics

Microscopic description

Prediction of liquid properties

See also
References
Liquid

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Liquid (disambiguation).

The formation of a spherical droplet of liquid water minimizes the surface area, which is the natural result of surface tension in liquids.
Part of a series on
Continuum mechanics
J
=
−
D
d
φ
d
x
{\displaystyle J=-D{\frac {d\varphi }{dx}}}
Fick's laws of diffusion
Laws
Solid mechanics
Fluid mechanics
Fluids
Statics · Dynamics
Archimedes' principle · Bernoulli's principle
Navier–Stokes equations
Poiseuille equation · Pascal's law
Viscosity
(Newtonian · non-Newtonian)
Buoyancy · Mixing · Pressure
Liquids
AdhesionCapillary actionChromatographyCohesion (chemistry)Surface tension
Gases
AtmosphereBoyle's lawCharles's lawCombined gas lawFick's lawGay-Lussac's lawGraham's law
Plasma
Rheology
Scientists
vte
A liquid is a nearly incompressible fluid that conforms to the shape of its container but retains a nearly constant volume independent of pressure. It is one of the four fundamental states of matter (the others being solid, gas, and plasma), and is the only state with a definite volume but no fixed shape.

The density of a liquid is usually close to that of a solid, and much higher than that of a gas. Therefore, liquid and solid are both termed condensed matter. On the other hand, as liquids and gases share the ability to flow, they are both called fluids.

A liquid is made up of tiny vibrating particles of matter, such as atoms, held together by intermolecular bonds. Like a gas, a liquid is able to flow and take the shape of a container. Unlike a gas, a liquid maintains a fairly constant density and does not disperse to fill every space of a container.

Although liquid water is abundant on Earth, this state of matter is actually the least common in the known universe, because liquids require a relatively narrow temperature/pressure range to exist. Most known matter in the universe is either gas (as interstellar clouds) or plasma (as stars).

Introduction

Thermal image of a sink full of hot water with cold water being added, showing how the hot and the cold water flow into each other
Liquid is one of the four primary states of matter, with the others being solid, gas and plasma. A liquid is a fluid. Unlike a solid, the molecules in a liquid have a much greater freedom to move. The forces that bind the molecules together in a solid are only temporary in a liquid, allowing a liquid to flow while a solid remains rigid.

A liquid, like a gas, displays the properties of a fluid. A liquid can flow, assume the shape of a container, and, if placed in a sealed container, will distribute applied pressure evenly to every surface in the container. If liquid is placed in a bag, it can be squeezed into any shape. Unlike a gas, a liquid is nearly incompressible, meaning that it occupies nearly a constant volume over a wide range of pressures; it does not generally expand to fill available space in a container but forms its own surface, and it may not always mix readily with another liquid. These properties make a liquid suitable for applications such as hydraulics.

Liquid particles are bound firmly but not rigidly. They are able to move around one another freely, resulting in a limited degree of particle mobility. As the temperature increases, the increased vibrations of the molecules causes distances between the molecules to increase. When a liquid reaches its boiling point, the cohesive forces that bind the molecules closely together break, and the liquid changes to its gaseous state (unless superheating occurs). If the temperature is decreased, the distances between the molecules become smaller. When the liquid reaches its freezing point the molecules will usually lock into a very specific order, called crystallizing, and the bonds between them become more rigid, changing the liquid into its solid state (unless supercooling occurs).

Examples
Only two elements are liquid at standard conditions for temperature and pressure: mercury and bromine. Four more elements have melting points slightly above room temperature: francium, caesium, gallium and rubidium.[1] In addition, certain mixtures of elements are liquid at room temperature, even if the individual elements are solid under the same conditions (see eutectic mixture). An example is the sodium-potassium metal alloy NaK.[2] Other metal alloys that are liquid at room temperature include galinstan, which is a gallium-indium-tin alloy that melts at −19 °C (−2 °F), as well as some amalgams (alloys involving mercury).[3]

Pure substances that are liquid under normal conditions include water, ethanol and many other organic solvents. Liquid water is of vital importance in chemistry and biology, and it is necessary for all known forms of life.[4][5]

Inorganic liquids include water, magma, inorganic nonaqueous solvents and many acids.

Important everyday liquids include aqueous solutions like household bleach, other mixtures of different substances such as mineral oil and gasoline, emulsions like vinaigrette or mayonnaise, suspensions like blood, and colloids like paint and milk.

Many gases can be liquefied by cooling, producing liquids such as liquid oxygen, liquid nitrogen, liquid hydrogen and liquid helium. Not all gases can be liquified at atmospheric pressure, however. Carbon dioxide, for example, can only be liquified at pressures above 5.1 atm.[6]

Some materials cannot be classified within the classical three states of matter. For example, liquid crystals (used in liquid-crystal displays) possess both solid-like and liquid-like properties, and belong to their own state of matter distinct from either liquid or solid.[7]

Applications

A lava lamp contains two immiscible liquids (a molten wax and a watery solution) which add movement due to convection. In addition to the top surface, surfaces also form between the liquids, requiring a tension breaker to recombine the wax droplets at the bottom.
Lubrication
See also: Tribology
Liquids are useful as lubricants due to their ability to form a thin, freely flowing layer between solid materials. Lubricants such as oil are chosen for viscosity and flow characteristics that are suitable throughout the operating temperature range of the component. Oils are often used in engines, gear boxes, metalworking, and hydraulic systems for their good lubrication properties.[8]

Solvation
Many liquids are used as solvents, to dissolve other liquids or solids. Solutions are found in a wide variety of applications, including paints, sealants, and adhesives. Naphtha and acetone are used frequently in industry to clean oil, grease, and tar from parts and machinery. Body fluids are water-based solutions.

Surfactants are commonly found in soaps and detergents. Solvents like alcohol are often used as antimicrobials. They are found in cosmetics, inks, and liquid dye lasers. They are used in the food industry, in processes such as the extraction of vegetable oil.[9]

Cooling
See also: Water cooling and Immersion cooling
Liquids tend to have better thermal conductivity than gases, and the ability to flow makes a liquid suitable for removing excess heat from mechanical components. The heat can be removed by channeling the liquid through a heat exchanger, such as a radiator, or the heat can be removed with the liquid during evaporation.[10] Water or glycol coolants are used to keep engines from overheating.[11] The coolants used in nuclear reactors include water or liquid metals, such as sodium or bismuth.[12] Liquid propellant films are used to cool the thrust chambers of rockets.[13] In machining, water and oils are used to remove the excess heat generated, which can quickly ruin both the work piece and the tooling. During perspiration, sweat removes heat from the human body by evaporating. In the heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning industry (HVAC), liquids such as water are used to transfer heat from one area to another.[14]

Cooking
Liquids are often used in cooking due to their excellent heat-transfer capabilities. In addition to thermal conduction, liquids transmit energy by convection. In particular, because warmer fluids expand and rise while cooler areas contract and sink, liquids with low kinematic viscosity tend to transfer heat through convection at a fairly constant temperature, making a liquid suitable for blanching, boiling, or frying. Even higher rates of heat transfer can be achieved by condensing a gas into a liquid. At the liquid's boiling point, all of the heat energy is used to cause the phase change from a liquid to a gas, without an accompanying increase in temperature, and is stored as chemical potential energy. When the gas condenses back into a liquid this excess heat-energy is released at a constant temperature. This phenomenon is used in processes such as steaming.

Distillation
Since liquids often have different boiling points, mixtures or solutions of liquids or gases can typically be separated by distillation, using heat, cold, vacuum, pressure, or other means. Distillation can be found in everything from the production of alcoholic beverages, to oil refineries, to the cryogenic distillation of gases such as argon, oxygen, nitrogen, neon, or xenon by liquefaction (cooling them below their individual boiling points).[15]

Hydraulics
Liquid is the primary component of hydraulic systems, which take advantage of Pascal's law to provide fluid power. Devices such as pumps and waterwheels have been used to change liquid motion into mechanical work since ancient times. Oils are forced through hydraulic pumps, which transmit this force to hydraulic cylinders. Hydraulics can be found in many applications, such as automotive brakes and transmissions, heavy equipment, and airplane control systems. Various hydraulic presses are used extensively in repair and manufacturing, for lifting, pressing, clamping and forming.[16]

Liquid metals
See also: Liquid metal § Applications
Liquid metals have several properties that are useful in sensing and actuation, particularly their electrical conductivity and ability to transmit forces (incompressibility). As freely flowing substances, liquid metals retain these bulk properties even under extreme deformation. For this reason, they have been proposed for use in soft robots and wearable healthcare devices, which must be able to operate under repeated deformation.[17][18] The metal gallium is considered to be a promising candidate for these applications as it is a liquid near room temperature, has low toxicity, and evaporates slowly.[19]

Miscellaneous
Liquids are sometimes used in measuring devices. A thermometer often uses the thermal expansion of liquids, such as mercury, combined with their ability to flow to indicate temperature. A manometer uses the weight of the liquid to indicate air pressure.[20]

The free surface of a rotating liquid forms a circular paraboloid and can therefore be used as a telescope. These are known as liquid-mirror telescopes.[21] They are significantly cheaper than conventional telescopes,[22] but can only point straight upward (zenith telescope). A common choice for the liquid is mercury.[citation needed]

Mechanical properties
Volume

Cavitation in water from a boat propeller
Quantities of liquids are measured in units of volume. These include the SI unit cubic metre (m3) and its divisions, in particular the cubic decimeter, more commonly called the litre (1 dm3 = 1 L = 0.001 m3), and the cubic centimetre, also called millilitre (1 cm3 = 1 mL = 0.001 L = 10−6 m3).[23]

The volume of a quantity of liquid is fixed by its temperature and pressure. Liquids generally expand when heated, and contract when cooled. Water between 0 °C and 4 °C is a notable exception.[24]

On the other hand, liquids have little compressibility. Water, for example, will compress by only 46.4 parts per million for every unit increase in atmospheric pressure (bar).[25] At around 4000 bar (400 megapascals or 58,000 psi) of pressure at room temperature water experiences only an 11% decrease in volume.[26] Incompressibility makes liquids suitable for transmitting hydraulic power, because a change in pressure at one point in a liquid is transmitted undiminished to every other part of the liquid and very little energy is lost in the form of compression.[27]

However, the negligible compressibility does lead to other phenomena. The banging of pipes, called water hammer, occurs when a valve is suddenly closed, creating a huge pressure-spike at the valve that travels backward through the system at just under the speed of sound. Another phenomenon caused by liquid's incompressibility is cavitation. Because liquids have little elasticity they can literally be pulled apart in areas of high turbulence or dramatic change in direction, such as the trailing edge of a boat propeller or a sharp corner in a pipe. A liquid in an area of low pressure (vacuum) vaporizes and forms bubbles, which then collapse as they enter high pressure areas. This causes liquid to fill the cavities left by the bubbles with tremendous localized force, eroding any adjacent solid surface.[28]

Pressure and buoyancy
Main article: Fluid statics
In a gravitational field, liquids exert pressure on the sides of a container as well as on anything within the liquid itself. This pressure is transmitted in all directions and increases with depth. If a liquid is at rest in a uniform gravitational field, the pressure 
p
{\displaystyle p} at depth 
z
{\displaystyle z} is given by[29]

p
=
p
0
+
ρ
g
z
{\displaystyle p=p_{0}+\rho gz\,}
where:

p
0
{\displaystyle p_{0}\,} is the pressure at the surface
ρ
{\displaystyle \rho \,} is the density of the liquid, assumed uniform with depth
g
{\displaystyle g\,} is the gravitational acceleration
For a body of water open to the air, 
p
0
{\displaystyle p_{0}} would be the atmospheric pressure.

Static liquids in uniform gravitational fields also exhibit the phenomenon of buoyancy, where objects immersed in the liquid experience a net force due to the pressure variation with depth. The magnitude of the force is equal to the weight of the liquid displaced by the object, and the direction of the force depends on the average density of the immersed object. If the density is smaller than that of the liquid, the buoyant force points upward and the object floats, whereas if the density is larger, the buoyant force points downward and the object sinks. This is known as Archimedes' principle.[30]

Surfaces
Main articles: Surface tension and Surface science

Surface waves in water
Unless the volume of a liquid exactly matches the volume of its container, one or more surfaces are observed. The presence of a surface introduces new phenomena which are not present in a bulk liquid. This is because a molecule at a surface possesses bonds with other liquid molecules only on the inner side of the surface, which implies a net force pulling surface molecules inward. Equivalently, this force can be described in terms of energy: there is a fixed amount of energy associated with forming a surface of a given area. This quantity is a material property called the surface tension, in units of energy per unit area (SI units: J/m2). Liquids with strong intermolecular forces tend to have large surface tensions.[31]

A practical implication of surface tension is that liquids tend to minimize their surface area, forming spherical drops and bubbles unless other constraints are present. Surface tension is responsible for a range of other phenomena as well, including surface waves, capillary action, wetting, and ripples. In liquids under nanoscale confinement, surface effects can play a dominating role since – compared with a macroscopic sample of liquid – a much greater fraction of molecules are located near a surface.

The surface tension of a liquid directly affects its wettability. Most common liquids have tensions ranging in the tens of mJ/m2, so droplets of oil, water, or glue can easily merge and adhere to other surfaces, whereas liquid metals such as mercury may have tensions ranging in the hundreds of mJ/m2, thus droplets do not combine easily and surfaces may only wet under specific conditions.

The surface tensions of common liquids occupy a relatively narrow range of values when exposed to changing conditions such as temperature, which contrasts strongly with the enormous variation seen in other mechanical properties, such as viscosity.[32]

The free surface of a liquid is disturbed by gravity (flatness) and waves (surface roughness).

Flow

A simulation of viscosity. The fluid on the left has a lower viscosity and Newtonian behavior while the liquid on the right has higher viscosity and non-Newtonian behavior.
Main articles: Fluid mechanics and Fluid dynamics
An important physical property characterizing the flow of liquids is viscosity. Intuitively, viscosity describes the resistance of a liquid to flow.

More technically, viscosity measures the resistance of a liquid to deformation at a given rate, such as when it is being sheared at finite velocity.[33] A specific example is a liquid flowing through a pipe: in this case the liquid undergoes shear deformation since it flows more slowly near the walls of the pipe than near the center. As a result, it exhibits viscous resistance to flow. In order to maintain flow, an external force must be applied, such as a pressure difference between the ends of the pipe.

The viscosity of liquids decreases with increasing temperature.[34]

Precise control of viscosity is important in many applications, particularly the lubrication industry. One way to achieve such control is by blending two or more liquids of differing viscosities in precise ratios.[35] In addition, various additives exist which can modulate the temperature-dependence of the viscosity of lubricating oils. This capability is important since machinery often operate over a range of temperatures (see also viscosity index).[36]

The viscous behavior of a liquid can be either Newtonian or non-Newtonian. A Newtonian liquid exhibits a linear strain/stress curve, meaning its viscosity is independent of time, shear rate, or shear-rate history. Examples of Newtonian liquids include water, glycerin, motor oil, honey, or mercury. A non-Newtonian liquid is one where the viscosity is not independent of these factors and either thickens (increases in viscosity) or thins (decreases in viscosity) under shear. Examples of non-Newtonian liquids include ketchup, custard, or starch solutions.[37]

Sound propagation
Main article: Speed of sound § Speed of sound in liquids
The speed of sound in a liquid is given by 
c
=
K
/
ρ
{\displaystyle c={\sqrt {K/\rho }}} where 
K
{\displaystyle K} is the bulk modulus of the liquid and 
ρ
{\displaystyle \rho } the density. As an example, water has a bulk modulus of about 2.2 GPa and a density of 1000 kg/m3, which gives c = 1.5 km/s.[38]

Thermodynamics
Phase transitions
Main articles: Boiling, Boiling point, Melting, and Melting point

A typical phase diagram. The dotted line gives the anomalous behaviour of water. The green lines show how the freezing point can vary with pressure, and the blue line shows how the boiling point can vary with pressure. The red line shows the boundary where sublimation or deposition can occur.
At a temperature below the boiling point, any matter in liquid form will evaporate until reaching equilibrium with the reverse process of condensation of its vapor. At this point the vapor will condense at the same rate as the liquid evaporates. Thus, a liquid cannot exist permanently if the evaporated liquid is continually removed.[39] A liquid at or above its boiling point will normally boil, though superheating can prevent this in certain circumstances.

At a temperature below the freezing point, a liquid will tend to crystallize, changing to its solid form. Unlike the transition to gas, there is no equilibrium at this transition under constant pressure,[citation needed] so unless supercooling occurs, the liquid will eventually completely crystallize. However, this is only true under constant pressure, so that (for example) water and ice in a closed, strong container might reach an equilibrium where both phases coexist. For the opposite transition from solid to liquid, see melting.

Liquids in space
The phase diagram explains why liquids do not exist in space or any other vacuum. Since the pressure is essentially zero (except on surfaces or interiors of planets and moons) water and other liquids exposed to space will either immediately boil or freeze depending on the temperature. In regions of space near the Earth, water will freeze if the sun is not shining directly on it and vaporize (sublime) as soon as it is in sunlight. If water exists as ice on the Moon, it can only exist in shadowed holes where the sun never shines and where the surrounding rock does not heat it up too much. At some point near the orbit of Saturn, the light from the Sun is too faint to sublime ice to water vapor. This is evident from the longevity of the ice that composes Saturn's rings.[40]

Solutions
Main article: Solution (chemistry)
Liquids can form solutions with gases, solids, and other liquids.

Two liquids are said to be miscible if they can form a solution in any proportion; otherwise they are immiscible. As an example, water and ethanol (drinking alcohol) are miscible whereas water and gasoline are immiscible.[41] In some cases a mixture of otherwise immiscible liquids can be stabilized to form an emulsion, where one liquid is dispersed throughout the other as microscopic droplets. Usually this requires the presence of a surfactant in order to stabilize the droplets. A familiar example of an emulsion is mayonnaise, which consists of a mixture of water and oil that is stabilized by lecithin, a substance found in egg yolks.[42]

Microscopic description
See also: Structure of liquids and glasses
The microscopic structure of liquids is complex and historically has been the subject of intense research and debate.[43][44][45][46] A few of the key ideas are explained below.

General description
Microscopically, liquids consist of a dense, disordered packing of molecules. This contrasts with the other two common phases of matter, gases and solids. Although gases are disordered, the molecules are well-separated in space and interact primarily through molecule-molecule collisions. Conversely, although the molecules in solids are densely packed, they usually fall into a regular structure, such as a crystalline lattice (glasses are a notable exception).

Short-range ordering

Structure of a classical monatomic liquid. Atoms have many nearest neighbors in contact, yet no long-range order is present.
While liquids do not exhibit long-range ordering as in a crystalline lattice, they do possess short-range order, which persists over a few molecular diameters.[47][48]

In all liquids, excluded volume interactions induce short-range order in molecular positions (center-of-mass coordinates). Classical monatomic liquids like argon and krypton are the simplest examples. Such liquids can be modeled as disordered "heaps" of closely packed spheres, and the short-range order corresponds to the fact that nearest and next-nearest neighbors in a packing of spheres tend to be separated by integer multiples of the diameter.[49][50]

In most liquids, molecules are not spheres, and intermolecular forces possess a directionality, i.e., they depend on the relative orientation of molecules. As a result, there is short-ranged orientational order in addition to the positional order mentioned above. Orientational order is especially important in hydrogen-bonded liquids like water.[51][52] The strength and directional nature of hydrogen bonds drives the formation of local "networks" or "clusters" of molecules. Due to the relative importance of thermal fluctuations in liquids (compared with solids), these structures are highly dynamic, continuously deforming, breaking, and reforming.[49][51]

Energy and entropy
The microscopic features of liquids derive from an interplay between attractive intermolecular forces and entropic forces.[53]

The attractive forces tend to pull molecules close together, and along with short-range repulsive interactions, they are the dominant forces behind the regular structure of solids. The entropic forces are not "forces" in the mechanical sense; rather, they describe the tendency of a system to maximize its entropy at fixed energy (see microcanonical ensemble). Roughly speaking, entropic forces drive molecules apart from each other, maximizing the volume they occupy. Entropic forces dominant in gases and explain the tendency of gases to fill their containers. In liquids, by contrast, the intermolecular and entropic forces are comparable, so it is not possible to neglect one in favor of the other. Quantitatively, the binding energy between adjacent molecules is the same order of magnitude as the thermal energy 
k
B
T
{\displaystyle k_{\text{B}}T}.[54]

No small parameter
The competition between energy and entropy makes liquids difficult to model at the molecular level, as there is no idealized "reference state" that can serve as a starting point for tractable theoretical descriptions. Mathematically, there is no small parameter from which one can develop a systematic perturbation theory.[44] This situation contrasts with both gases and solids. For gases, the reference state is the ideal gas, and the density can be used as a small parameter to construct a theory of real (nonideal) gases (see virial expansion).[55] For crystalline solids, the reference state is a perfect crystalline lattice, and possible small parameters are thermal motions and lattice defects.[51]

Role of quantum mechanics
Like all known forms of matter, liquids are fundamentally quantum mechanical. However, under standard conditions (near room temperature and pressure), much of the macroscopic behavior of liquids can be understood in terms of classical mechanics.[54][56] The "classical picture" posits that the constituent molecules are discrete entities that interact through intermolecular forces according to Newton's laws of motion. As a result, their macroscopic properties can be described using classical statistical mechanics. While the intermolecular force law technically derives from quantum mechanics, it is usually understood as a model input to classical theory, obtained either from a fit to experimental data or from the classical limit of a quantum mechanical description.[57][47] An illustrative, though highly simplified example is a collection of spherical molecules interacting through a Lennard-Jones potential.[54]

Table 1: Thermal de Broglie wavelengths 
Λ
{\displaystyle \Lambda } of selected liquids.[54] Quantum effects are negligible when the ratio 
Λ
/
a
{\displaystyle \Lambda /a} is small, where 
a
{\displaystyle a} is the average distance between molecules.
Liquid	Temperature (K)	
Λ
{\displaystyle \Lambda } (nm)	
Λ
/
a
{\displaystyle \Lambda /a}
Hydrogen (H2)	14.1	0.33	0.97
Neon	24.5	0.078	0.26
Krypton	116	0.018	0.046
Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)	250	0.009	0.017
For the classical limit to apply, a necessary condition is that the thermal de Broglie wavelength,

Λ
=
(
2
π
ℏ
2
m
k
B
T
)
1
/
2
{\displaystyle \Lambda =\left({\frac {2\pi \hbar ^{2}}{mk_{\text{B}}T}}\right)^{1/2}}
is small compared with the length scale under consideration.[54][58] Here, 
ℏ
{\displaystyle \hbar } is the Planck constant and 
m
{\displaystyle m} is the molecule's mass. Typical values of 
Λ
{\displaystyle \Lambda } are about 0.01-0.1 nanometers (Table 1). Hence, a high-resolution model of liquid structure at the nanoscale may require quantum mechanical considerations. A notable example is hydrogen bonding in associated liquids like water,[59][60] where, due to the small mass of the proton, inherently quantum effects such as zero-point motion and tunneling are important.[61]

For a liquid to behave classically at the macroscopic level, 
Λ
{\displaystyle \Lambda } must be small compared with the average distance 
a
≈
ρ
−
1
/
3
{\displaystyle a\approx \rho ^{-1/3}} between molecules.[54] That is,

Λ
a
≪
1
{\displaystyle {\frac {\Lambda }{a}}\ll 1}
Representative values of this ratio for a few liquids are given in Table 1. The conclusion is that quantum effects are important for liquids at low temperatures and with small molecular mass.[54][56] For dynamic processes, there is an additional timescale constraint:

τ
≫
h
k
B
T
{\displaystyle \tau \gg {\frac {h}{k_{B}T}}}
where 
τ
{\displaystyle \tau } is the timescale of the process under consideration. For room-temperature liquids, the right-hand side is about 10−14 seconds, which generally means that time-dependent processes involving translational motion can be described classically.[54]

At extremely low temperatures, even the macroscopic behavior of certain liquids deviates from classical mechanics. Notable examples are hydrogen and helium. Due to their low temperature and mass, such liquids have a thermal de Broglie wavelength comparable to the average distance between molecules.[54]

Dynamic phenomena
The expression for the sound velocity of a liquid,

c
=
K
/
ρ
{\displaystyle c={\sqrt {K/\rho }}},
contains the bulk modulus K. If K is frequency-independent, then the liquid behaves as a linear medium, so that sound propagates without dissipation or mode coupling. In reality, all liquids show some dispersion: with increasing frequency, K crosses over from the low-frequency, liquid-like limit 
K
0
{\displaystyle K_{0}} to the high-frequency, solid-like limit 
K
∞
{\displaystyle K_{\infty }}. In normal liquids, most of this crossover takes place at frequencies between GHz and THz, sometimes called hypersound.

At sub-GHz frequencies, a normal liquid cannot sustain shear waves: the zero-frequency limit of the shear modulus is 0. This is sometimes seen as the defining property of a liquid.[62][63] However, like the bulk modulus K, the shear modulus G is also frequency-dependent and exhibits a similar crossover at hypersound frequencies.

According to linear response theory, the Fourier transform of K or G describes how the system returns to equilibrium after an external perturbation; for this reason, the dispersion step in the GHz to THz region is also called relaxation. As a liquid is supercooled toward the glass transition, the structural relaxation time exponentially increases, which explains the viscoelastic behavior of glass-forming liquids.


Radial distribution function of the Lennard-Jones model fluid
Experimental methods
The absence of long-range order in liquids is mirrored by the absence of Bragg peaks in X-ray and neutron diffraction. Under normal conditions, the diffraction pattern has circular symmetry, expressing the isotropy of the liquid. Radially, the diffraction intensity smoothly oscillates. This can be described by the static structure factor 
S
(
q
)
{\displaystyle S(q)}, with wavenumber 
q
=
(
4
π
/
λ
)
sin
⁡
θ
{\displaystyle q=(4\pi /\lambda )\sin \theta } given by the wavelength 
λ
{\displaystyle \lambda } of the probe (photon or neutron) and the Bragg angle 
θ
{\displaystyle \theta }. The oscillations of 
S
(
q
)
{\displaystyle S(q)} express the short-range order of the liquid, i.e., the correlations between a molecule and "shells" of nearest neighbors, next-nearest neighbors, and so on.

An equivalent representation of these correlations is the radial distribution function 
g
(
r
)
{\displaystyle g(r)}, which is related to the Fourier transform of 
S
(
q
)
{\displaystyle S(q)}.[49] It represents a spatial average of a temporal snapshot of pair correlations in the liquid.

Prediction of liquid properties
See also: Computational materials science
Methods for predicting liquid properties can be organized by their "scale" of description, that is, the length scales and time scales over which they apply.[64][65]

Macroscopic methods use equations that directly model the large-scale behavior of liquids, such as their thermodynamic properties and flow behavior.
Microscopic methods use equations that model the dynamics of individual molecules.
Mesoscopic methods fall in between, combining elements of both continuum and particle-based models.
Macroscopic
Empirical correlations
Empirical correlations are simple mathematical expressions intended to approximate a liquid's properties over a range of experimental conditions, such as varying temperature and pressure.[66] They are constructed by fitting simple functional forms to experimental data. For example, the temperature-dependence of liquid viscosity is sometimes approximated by the function 
η
(
T
)
=
A
e
B
/
T
{\displaystyle \eta (T)=Ae^{B/T}}, where 
A
{\displaystyle A} and 
B
{\displaystyle B} are fitting constants.[67] Empirical correlations allow for extremely efficient estimates of physical properties, which can be useful in thermophysical simulations. However, they require high quality experimental data to obtain a good fit and cannot reliably extrapolate beyond the conditions covered by experiments.

Thermodynamic potentials
See also: Equation of state
Thermodynamic potentials are functions that characterize the equilibrium state of a substance. An example is the Gibbs free energy 
G
(
p
,
T
)
{\displaystyle G(p,T)}, which is a function of pressure and temperature. Knowing any one thermodynamic potential 
F
{\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}} is sufficient to compute all equilibrium properties of a substance, often simply by taking derivatives of 
F
{\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}}.[55] Thus, a single correlation for 
F
{\displaystyle {\mathcal {F}}} can replace separate correlations for individual properties.[68][69] Conversely, a variety of experimental measurements (e.g., density, heat capacity, vapor pressure) can be incorporated into the same fit; in principle, this would allow one to predict hard-to-measure properties like heat capacity in terms of other, more readily available measurements (e.g., vapor pressure).[70]

Hydrodynamics
Main articles: Fluid dynamics and Computational fluid dynamics
Hydrodynamic theories describe liquids in terms of space- and time-dependent macroscopic fields, such as density, velocity, and temperature. These fields obey partial differential equations, which can be linear or nonlinear.[71] Hydrodynamic theories are more general than equilibrium thermodynamic descriptions, which assume that liquids are approximately homogeneous and time-independent. The Navier-Stokes equations are a well-known example: they are partial differential equations giving the time evolution of density, velocity, and temperature of a viscous fluid. There are numerous methods for numerically solving the Navier-Stokes equations and its variants.[72][73]

Mesoscopic
See also: Mesoscopic physics
Mesoscopic methods operate on length and time scales between the particle and continuum levels. For this reason, they combine elements of particle-based dynamics and continuum hydrodynamics.[64]

An example is the lattice Boltzmann method, which models a fluid as a collection of fictitious particles that exist on a lattice.[64] The particles evolve in time through streaming (straight-line motion) and collisions. Conceptually, it is based on the Boltzmann equation for dilute gases, where the dynamics of a molecule consists of free motion interrupted by discrete binary collisions, but it is also applied to liquids. Despite the analogy with individual molecular trajectories, it is a coarse-grained description that typically operates on length and time scales larger than those of true molecular dynamics (hence the notion of "fictitious" particles).

Other methods that combine elements of continuum and particle-level dynamics include smoothed-particle hydrodynamics,[74][75] dissipative particle dynamics,[76] and multiparticle collision dynamics.[77]

Microscopic
Microscopic simulation methods work directly with the equations of motion (classical or quantum) of the constituent molecules.

Classical molecular dynamics
Main articles: Molecular dynamics and Molecular mechanics
Classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulates liquids using Newton's law of motion; from Newton's second law (
F
=
m
x
¨
{\displaystyle F=m{\ddot {x}}}), the trajectories of molecules can be traced out explicitly and used to compute macroscopic liquid properties like density or viscosity. However, classical MD requires expressions for the intermolecular forces ("F" in Newton's second law). Usually, these must be approximated using experimental data or some other input.[47]

Ab initio (quantum) molecular dynamics
See also: Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics
Ab initio quantum mechanical methods simulate liquids using only the laws of quantum mechanics and fundamental atomic constants.[57] In contrast with classical molecular dynamics, the intermolecular force fields are an output of the calculation, rather than an input based on experimental measurements or other considerations. In principle, ab initio methods can simulate the properties of a given liquid without any prior experimental data. However, they are very expensive computationally, especially for large molecules with internal structure.

See also
Ionic liquid
Heavy liquid
Liquid dielectric
Liquid marbles
Liquid breathing
Liquid resistor
Microfluidics
Fluidized bed
Supercritical fluid
References
 Theodore Gray, The Elements: A Visual Exploration of Every Known Atom in the Universe New York: Workman Publishing, 2009, p. 127 ISBN 1-57912-814-9
 Leonchuk, Sergei S.; Falchevskaya, Aleksandra S.; Nikolaev, Vitaly; Vinogradov, Vladimir V. (2022). "NaK alloy: underrated liquid metal". Journal of Materials Chemistry A. 10 (43). Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC): 22955–22976. doi:10.1039/d2ta06882f. ISSN 2050-7488. S2CID 252979251.
 Surmann, Peter; Zeyat, Hanan (2005-10-15). "Voltammetric analysis using a self-renewable non-mercury electrode". Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry. 383 (6). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 1009–1013. doi:10.1007/s00216-005-0069-7. ISSN 1618-2642. PMID 16228199. S2CID 22732411.
 Mottl, Michael J.; Glazer, Brian T.; Kaiser, Ralf I.; Meech, Karen J. (December 2007). "Water and astrobiology" (PDF). Geochemistry. 67 (4): 253–282. Bibcode:2007ChEG...67..253M. doi:10.1016/j.chemer.2007.09.002. ISSN 0009-2819.
 Chyba, Christopher F.; Hand, Kevin P. (1 September 2005). "Astrobiology: The Study of the Living Universe". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 43 (1): 31–74. Bibcode:2005ARA&A..43...31C. doi:10.1146/annurev.astro.43.051804.102202. eISSN 1545-4282. ISSN 0066-4146.
 Silberberg, Martin S. (2009), Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, McGraw-Hill Higher Education, pp. 448–449, ISBN 978-0-07-304859-8
 Andrienko, Denis (October 2018). "Introduction to liquid crystals". Journal of Molecular Liquids. 267: 520–541. doi:10.1016/j.molliq.2018.01.175. ISSN 0167-7322.
 Theo Mang, Wilfried Dressel Lubricants and lubrication, Wiley-VCH 2007 ISBN 3-527-31497-0
 George Wypych Handbook of solvents William Andrew Publishing 2001 pp. 847–881 ISBN 1-895198-24-0
 N. B. Vargaftik Handbook of thermal conductivity of liquids and gases CRC Press 1994 ISBN 0-8493-9345-0
 Jack Erjavec Automotive technology: a systems approach Delmar Learning 2000 p. 309 ISBN 1-4018-4831-1
 Gerald Wendt The prospects of nuclear power and technology D. Van Nostrand Company 1957 p. 266
 Modern engineering for design of liquid-propellant rocket engines by Dieter K. Huzel, David H. Huang – American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 1992 p. 99 ISBN 1-56347-013-6
 Thomas E Mull HVAC principles and applications manual McGraw-Hill 1997 ISBN 0-07-044451-X
 Earle, R. L. (1983). Unit operations in food processing. Oxford: Pergamon Press. pp. 56–62, 138–141. ISBN 0-08-025537-X. OCLC 8451210.
 R. Keith Mobley Fluid power dynamics Butterworth-Heinemann 2000 p. vii ISBN 0-7506-7174-2
 Dickey, Michael D. (2017-04-18). "Stretchable and Soft Electronics using Liquid Metals". Advanced Materials. 29 (27). Wiley: 1606425. Bibcode:2017AdM....2906425D. doi:10.1002/adma.201606425. ISSN 0935-9648. PMID 28417536. S2CID 205276487.
 Cole, Tim; Khoshmanesh, Khashayar; Tang, Shi-Yang (2021-05-04). "Liquid Metal Enabled Biodevices". Advanced Intelligent Systems. 3 (7). Wiley: 2000275. doi:10.1002/aisy.202000275. ISSN 2640-4567. S2CID 235568215.
 Tang, Shi-Yang; Tabor, Christopher; Kalantar-Zadeh, Kourosh; Dickey, Michael D. (2021-07-26). "Gallium Liquid Metal: The Devil's Elixir". Annual Review of Materials Research. 51 (1). Annual Reviews: 381–408. Bibcode:2021AnRMS..51..381T. doi:10.1146/annurev-matsci-080819-125403. ISSN 1531-7331. S2CID 236566966.
 Bela G. Liptak Instrument engineers' handbook: process control CRC Press 1999 p. 807 ISBN 0-8493-1081-4
 Hickson, Paul; Borra, Ermanno F.; Cabanac, Remi; Content, Robert; Gibson, Brad K.; Walker, Gordon A. H. (1994). "UBC/Laval 2.7 meter liquid mirror telescope". The Astrophysical Journal. 436. American Astronomical Society: L201. arXiv:astro-ph/9406057. Bibcode:1994ApJ...436L.201H. doi:10.1086/187667. ISSN 0004-637X.
 Hickson, Paul; Racine, Réne (2007). "Image Quality of Liquid-Mirror Telescopes". Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific. 119 (854). IOP Publishing: 456–465. Bibcode:2007PASP..119..456H. doi:10.1086/517619. ISSN 0004-6280. S2CID 120735632.
 Knight, Randall D. (2008), Physics for Scientists and Engineers: A Strategic Approach (With Modern Physics), Addison-Wesley, p. 443, ISBN 978-0-8053-2736-6
 Silberberg, Martin S. (2009), Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, McGraw-Hill Higher Education, p. 461, ISBN 978-0-07-304859-8
 "Compressibility of Liquids". hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu. Archived from the original on 7 December 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2018.
 Intelligent Energy Field Manufacturing: Interdisciplinary Process Innovations By Wenwu Zhang -- CRC Press 2011 Page 144
 Knight (2008) p. 454
 Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines by S. C. Gupta -- Dorling-Kindersley 2006 Page 85
 Knight (2008) p. 448
 Knight (2008) pp. 455-459
 Silberberg, Martin S. (2009), Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, McGraw-Hill Higher Education, p. 457, ISBN 978-0-07-304859-8
 Edward Yu. Bormashenko (5 November 2018). Wetting of Real Surfaces. De Gruyter. pp. 3–5. ISBN 978-3-11-058314-4.
 Landau, L.D.; Lifshitz, E.M. (1987), Fluid Mechanics (2nd ed.), Pergamon Press, pp. 44–45, ISBN 978-0-08-033933-7
 Bird, R. Byron; Stewart, Warren E.; Lightfoot, Edwin N. (2007), Transport Phenomena (2nd ed.), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., p. 21, ISBN 978-0-470-11539-8
 Zhmud, Boris (2014), "Viscosity Blending Equations" (PDF), Lube-Tech, 93
 "Viscosity Index". UK: Anton Paar. Archived from the original on March 9, 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2018.
 Honey in Traditional and Modern Medicine by Laid Boukraa -- CRC Press 2014 Page 22--24
 Taylor, John R. (2005), Classical Mechanics, University Science Books, pp. 727–729, ISBN 978-1-891389-22-1
 March, N.H.; Tosi, M.P. (2002), Introduction to Liquid State Physics, World Scientific, p. 7, Bibcode:2002ilsp.book.....M, doi:10.1142/4717, ISBN 978-981-3102-53-8
 Siegel, Ethan (2014-12-11). "Does water freeze or boil in space?". Starts With A Bang!. Retrieved 2022-02-10.
 Silberberg, pp. 188 and 502
 Miodownik, Mark (2019), Liquid rules: The Delightful and Dangerous Substances that Flow Through Our Lives, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, p. 124, ISBN 978-0-544-85019-4
 Chandler, David (2017-05-05). "From 50 Years Ago, the Birth of Modern Liquid-State Science". Annual Review of Physical Chemistry. 68 (1). Annual Reviews: 19–38. arXiv:1609.04837. Bibcode:2017ARPC...68...19C. doi:10.1146/annurev-physchem-052516-044941. ISSN 0066-426X. PMID 28375691. S2CID 37248336.
 Trachenko, K; Brazhkin, V V (2015-12-22). "Collective modes and thermodynamics of the liquid state". Reports on Progress in Physics. 79 (1). IOP Publishing: 016502. arXiv:1512.06592. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/79/1/016502. ISSN 0034-4885. PMID 26696098. S2CID 42203015.
 Ben-Naim, Arieh (2009). Molecular theory of water and aqueous solutions. Part 1, Understanding water. Singapore: World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-283-761-5. OCLC 696342117.
 Pothoczki, Szilvia; Temleitner, László; Pusztai, László (2015-12-01). "Structure of Neat Liquids Consisting of (Perfect and Nearly) Tetrahedral Molecules". Chemical Reviews. 115 (24). American Chemical Society (ACS): 13308–13361. doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00308. ISSN 0009-2665. PMID 26624528.
 Maitland, Geoffrey C.; Rigby, Maurice; Smith, E. Brian; Wakeham, W. A. (1981). Intermolecular forces: their origin and determination. Oxford. ISBN 0-19-855611-X. OCLC 8139179.
 Gallo, Paola; Rovere, Mauro (2021). Physics of liquid matter. Cham: Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-68349-8. OCLC 1259588062.
 Chandler, David (1987). Introduction to modern statistical mechanics. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-504276-X. OCLC 13946448.
 Finney, John L. (2013-02-22). "Bernal's road to random packing and the structure of liquids". Philosophical Magazine. 93 (31–33). Informa UK Limited: 3940–3969. Bibcode:2013PMag...93.3940F. doi:10.1080/14786435.2013.770179. ISSN 1478-6435. S2CID 55689631.
 Finney, J. L. (2015). Water: a very short introduction. Oxford, United Kingdom. pp. 48–52. ISBN 978-0-19-870872-8. OCLC 914537747.
 Ludwig, Ralf (2005-07-11). "The Structure of Liquid Methanol". ChemPhysChem. 6 (7). Wiley: 1369–1375. doi:10.1002/cphc.200400663. ISSN 1439-4235. PMID 15991270.
 Chandler, David (2009-09-08). "Liquids: Condensed, disordered, and sometimes complex". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 106 (36): 15111–15112. doi:10.1073/pnas.0908029106. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2741213. PMID 19805248.
 Hansen, Jean-Pierre; McDonald, Ian R. (2013). Theory of simple liquids: with applications to soft matter. Amsterdam. ISBN 978-0-12-387033-9. OCLC 855895733.
 Kardar, Mehran (2007). Statistical physics of particles. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-521-87342-0. OCLC 148639922.
 Gray, C. G.; Gubbins, Keith E.; Joslin, C. G. (1984–2011). Theory of molecular fluids. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-855602-0. OCLC 10145548.
 Marx, Dominik; Hutter, Jürg (2012). Ab initio molecular dynamics: basic theory and advanced methods. Cambridge. ISBN 978-0-521-89863-8. OCLC 869135580.
 Fisher, I.Z. (1964), Statistical Theory of Liquids, The University of Chicago Press
 Ceriotti, Michele; Cuny, Jérôme; Parrinello, Michele; Manolopoulos, David E. (2013-09-06). "Nuclear quantum effects and hydrogen bond fluctuations in water". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110 (39): 15591–15596. Bibcode:2013PNAS..11015591C. doi:10.1073/pnas.1308560110. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 3785726. PMID 24014589.
 Markland, Thomas E.; Ceriotti, Michele (2018-02-28). "Nuclear quantum effects enter the mainstream". Nature Reviews Chemistry. 2 (3). Springer Science and Business Media LLC. arXiv:1803.01037. doi:10.1038/s41570-017-0109. ISSN 2397-3358. S2CID 4938804.
 Li, Xin-Zheng; Walker, Brent; Michaelides, Angelos (2011-04-04). "Quantum nature of the hydrogen bond". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 108 (16): 6369–6373. Bibcode:2011PNAS..108.6369L. doi:10.1073/pnas.1016653108. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 3081025.
 Born, Max (1940). "On the stability of crystal lattices". Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. 36 (2): 160–172. Bibcode:1940PCPS...36..160B. doi:10.1017/S0305004100017138. S2CID 104272002.
 Born, Max (1939). "Thermodynamics of Crystals and Melting". Journal of Chemical Physics. 7 (8): 591–604. Bibcode:1939JChPh...7..591B. doi:10.1063/1.1750497. Archived from the original on 2016-05-15.
 Krüger, Timm; Kusumaatmaja, Halim; Kuzmin, Alexandr; Shardt, Orest; Silva, Goncalo; Viggen, Erlend Magnus (2016). The lattice Boltzmann method: principles and practice. Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-319-44649-3. OCLC 963198053.
 Steinhauser, M. O. (2022). Computational multiscale modeling of fluids and solids: theory and applications. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-98954-5. OCLC 1337924123.
 Poling, Bruce E.; Prausnitz, J. M.; O'Connell, John P. (2001). The properties of gases and liquids. New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-011682-2. OCLC 44712950.
 Bird, R. Byron; Stewart, Warren E.; Lightfoot, Edwin N. (2007). Transport Phenomena (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-0-470-11539-8. Archived from the original on 2020-03-02. Retrieved 2019-09-18.
 Span, R. (2000). Multiparameter Equations of State: An Accurate Source of Thermodynamic Property Data. Engineering online library. Springer. p. 1. ISBN 978-3-540-67311-8. Retrieved 2023-04-01.
 Huber, Marcia L.; Lemmon, Eric W.; Bell, Ian H.; McLinden, Mark O. (2022-06-22). "The NIST REFPROP Database for Highly Accurate Properties of Industrially Important Fluids". Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research. 61 (42). American Chemical Society (ACS): 15449–15472. doi:10.1021/acs.iecr.2c01427. ISSN 0888-5885. PMC 9619405. PMID 36329835. S2CID 249968848.
 Tillner-Roth, Reiner; Friend, Daniel G. (1998). "A Helmholtz Free Energy Formulation of the Thermodynamic Properties of the Mixture {Water + Ammonia}". Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data. 27 (1). AIP Publishing: 63–96. doi:10.1063/1.556015. ISSN 0047-2689.
 Moffatt, H.K. (2015), "Fluid Dynamics", in Nicholas J. Higham; et al. (eds.), The Princeton Companion to Applied Mathematics, Princeton University Press, pp. 467–476
 Wendt, John F.; Anderson, John D. Jr.; Von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics (2008). Computational fluid dynamics: an introduction. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-85056-4. OCLC 656397653.
 Pozrikidis, C. (2011). Introduction to theoretical and computational fluid dynamics. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-990912-4. OCLC 812917029.
 Monaghan, J J (2005-07-05). "Smoothed particle hydrodynamics". Reports on Progress in Physics. 68 (8). IOP Publishing: 1703–1759. Bibcode:2005RPPh...68.1703M. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/68/8/r01. ISSN 0034-4885. S2CID 5987481.
 Lind, Steven J.; Rogers, Benedict D.; Stansby, Peter K. (2020). "Review of smoothed particle hydrodynamics: towards converged Lagrangian flow modelling". Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 476 (2241). The Royal Society. Bibcode:2020RSPSA.47690801L. doi:10.1098/rspa.2019.0801. ISSN 1364-5021. PMC 7544338. PMID 33071565. S2CID 221538477.
 Español, Pep; Warren, Patrick B. (2017-04-21). "Perspective: Dissipative particle dynamics". The Journal of Chemical Physics. 146 (15). AIP Publishing: 150901. arXiv:1612.04574. Bibcode:2017JChPh.146o0901E. doi:10.1063/1.4979514. ISSN 0021-9606. PMID 28433024. S2CID 961922.
 Gompper, G.; Ihle, T.; Kroll, D. M.; Winkler, R. G. (2009). "Multi-Particle Collision Dynamics: A Particle-Based Mesoscale Simulation Approach to the Hydrodynamics of Complex Fluids". Advanced Computer Simulation Approaches for Soft Matter Sciences III. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 1–87. arXiv:0808.2157. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-87706-6_1. ISBN 978-3-540-87705-9. S2CID 8433369.
vte
States of matter (list, timeline)
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicIsrael
Categories: LiquidsPhases of matterViscosity
This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 05:19 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Liquid

136 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
History
Computer architecture

Instruction set architecture
Microarchitecture
Cooling
Types of computer hardware systems

Personal computer
Large-scale computers
Virtual hardware
Embedded system
Components

Case
Power supply
Motherboard
Expansion cards
Input/output
Sales
Recycling

Toxic computer components
Environmental effects
Efforts for minimizing computer hardware waste
See also
References
Sources
External links
Computer hardware

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

PDP-11 CPU board
Computer hardware includes the physical parts of a computer, such as the central processing unit (CPU), random-access memory (RAM), motherboard, computer data storage, graphics card, sound card, and computer case. It includes external devices such as a monitor, mouse, keyboard, and speakers.[1][2]

By contrast, software is a set of written instructions that can be stored and run by hardware. Hardware derived its name from the fact it is hard or rigid with respect to changes, whereas software is soft because it is easy to change.

Hardware is typically directed by the software to execute any command or instruction. A combination of hardware and software forms a usable computing system, although other systems exist with only hardware.

History
Further information: History of computing
Early computing devices were more complicated than the ancient abacus date to the seventeenth century. French mathematician Blaise Pascal designed a gear-based device that could add and subtract, selling around 50 models. The stepped reckoner was invented by Gottfried Leibniz by 1676, which could also divide and multiply. Due to the limitations of contemporary fabrication and design flaws, Leibniz' reckoner was not very functional, but similar devices (Leibniz wheel) remained in use into the 1970s.[3] In the 19th century, Englishman Charles Babbage invented the difference engine, a mechanical device to calculate polynomials for astronomical purposes.[4] Babbage also designed a general-purpose computer that was never built. Much of the design was incorporated into the earliest computers: punch cards for input and output, memory, an arithmetic unit analogous to central processing units, and even a primitive programming language similar to assembly language.[5]

In 1936, Alan Turing developed the universal Turing machine to model any type of computer, proving that no computer would be able to solve the decision problem.[6] The universal Turing machine was a type of stored-program computer capable of mimicking the operations of any Turing machine (computer model) based on the software instructions passed to it. The storage of computer programs is key to the operation of modern computers and is the connection between computer hardware and software.[7] Even prior to this, in the mid-19th century mathematician George Boole invented Boolean algebra—a system of logic where each proposition is either true or false. Boolean algebra is now the basis of the circuits that model the transistors and other components of integrated circuits that make up modern computer hardware.[8] In 1945, Turing finished the design for a computer (the Automatic Computing Engine) that was never built.[9]


Von Neumann architecture scheme
Around this time, technological advancement in relays and vacuum tubes enabled the construction of the first computers.[10] Building on Babbage's design, relay computers were built by George Stibitz at Bell Laboratories and Harvard University's Howard Aiken, who engineered the MARK I.[5] Also in 1945, mathematician John von Neumann—working on the ENIAC project at the University of Pennsylvania—devised the underlying von Neumann architecture that has served as the template for most modern computers.[11] Von Neumann's design featured a centralized memory that stored both data and programs, a central processing unit (CPU) with priority of access to the memory, and input and output (I/O) units. Von Neumann used a single bus to transfer data, meaning that his solution to the storage problem by locating programs and data adjacent to each other created the Von Neumann bottleneck when the system tries to fetch both at the same time—often throttling the system's performance.[12]

Computer architecture
Main article: computer architecture

Growth in processor performance (as measured by benchmarks),[13] 1978–2010
Computer architecture requires prioritizing between different goals, such as cost, speed, availability, and energy efficiency. The designer must have a good grasp of the hardware requirements and many different aspects of computing, from compilers to integrated circuit design.[14] Cost has also become a significant constraint for manufacturers seeking to sell their products for less money than competitors offering a very similar hardware component. Profit margins have also been reduced.[15] Even when the performance is not increasing, the cost of components has been dropping over time due to improved manufacturing techniques that have fewer components rejected at quality assurance stage.[16]

Instruction set architecture
The most common instruction set architecture (ISA)—the interface between a computer's hardware and software—is based on the one devised by von Neumann in 1945.[17] Despite the separation of the computing unit and the I/O system in many diagrams, typically the hardware is shared, with a bit in the computing unit indicating whether it is in computation or I/O mode.[18] Common types of ISAs include CISC (complex instruction set computer), RISC (reduced instruction set computer), vector operations, and hybrid modes.[19] CISC involves using a larger expression set to minimize the number of instructions the machines need to use.[20] Based on a recognition that only a few instructions are commonly used, RISC shrinks the instruction set for added simplicity, which also enables the inclusion of more registers.[21] After the invention of RISC in the 1980s, RISC based architectures that used pipelining and caching to increase performance displaced CISC architectures, particularly in applications with restrictions on power usage or space (such as mobile phones). From 1986 to 2003, the annual rate of improvement in hardware performance exceeded 50 percent, enabling the development of new computing devices such as tablets and mobiles.[22] Alongside the density of transistors, DRAM memory as well as flash and magnetic disk storage also became exponentially more compact and cheaper. The rate of improvement slackened off in the twenty-first century.[23]

In the twenty-first century, increases in performance have been driven by increasing exploitation of parallelism.[24] Applications are often parallelizable in two ways: either the same function is running across multiple areas of data (data parallelism) or different tasks can be performed simultaneously with limited interaction (task parallelism).[25] These forms of parallelism are accommodated by various hardware strategies, including instruction-level parallelism (such as instruction pipelining), vector architectures and graphical processing units (GPUs) that are able to implement data parallelism, thread-level parallelism and request-level parallelism (both implementing task-level parallelism).[25]

Microarchitecture
Microarchitecture, also known as computer organization, refers to high-level hardware questions such as the design of the CPU, memory, and memory interconnect.[26] Memory hierarchy ensures that the memory quicker to access (and more expensive) is located closer to the CPU, while slower, cheaper memory for large-volume storage is located further away.[27] Memory is typically segregated to separate programs from data and limit an attacker's ability to alter programs.[28] Most computers use virtual memory to simplify addressing for programs, using the operating system to map virtual memory to different areas of the finite physical memory.[29]

Cooling
Computer processors generate heat, and excessive heat impacts their performance and can harm the components. Many computer chips will automatically throttle their performance to avoid overheating. Computers also typically have mechanisms for dissipating excessive heat, such as air or liquid coolers for the CPU and GPU and heatsinks for other components, such as the RAM. Computer cases are also often ventilated to help dissipate heat from the computer.[30] Data centers typically use more sophisticated cooling solutions to keep the operating temperature of the entire center safe. Air-cooled systems are more common in smaller or older data centers, while liquid-cooled immersion (where each computer is surrounded by cooling fluid) and direct-to-chip (where the cooling fluid is directed to each computer chip) can be more expensive but are also more efficient.[31] Most computers are designed to be more powerful than their cooling system, but their sustained operations cannot exceed the capacity of the cooling system.[32] While performance can be temporarily increased when the computer is not hot (overclocking),[33] in order to protect the hardware from excessive heat, the system will automatically reduce performance or shut down the processor if necessary.[32] Processors also will shut off or enter a low power mode when inactive to reduce heat.[34] Power delivery as well as heat dissipation are the most challenging aspects of hardware design,[35] and have been the limiting factor to the development of smaller and faster chips since the early twenty-first century.[34] Increases in performance require a commensurate increase in energy use and cooling demand.[36]

Types of computer hardware systems
Personal computer

Basic hardware components of a personal computer, including a monitor, a motherboard, a CPU, a RAM, two expansion cards, a power supply, an optical disc drive, a hard disk drive, a keyboard and a mouse

Inside a custom-built computer: power supply at the bottom has its own cooling fan
The personal computer is one of the most common types of computer due to its versatility and relatively low price.

Desktop personal computers have a monitor, a keyboard, a mouse, and a computer case. The computer case holds the motherboard, fixed or removable disk drives for data storage, the power supply, and may contain other peripheral devices such as modems or network interfaces. Some models of desktop computers integrated the monitor and keyboard into the same case as the processor and power supply. Separating the elements allows the user to arrange the components in a pleasing, comfortable array, at the cost of managing power and data cables between them.
Laptops are designed for portability but operate similarly to desktop PCs.[37] They may use lower-power or reduced size components, with lower performance than a similarly priced desktop computer.[38] Laptops contain the keyboard, display, and processor in one case. The monitor in the folding upper cover of the case can be closed for transportation, to protect the screen and keyboard. Instead of a mouse, laptops may have a touchpad or pointing stick.
Tablets are portable computers that use a touch screen as the primary input device. Tablets generally weigh less and are smaller than laptops.[citation needed] Some tablets include fold-out keyboards or offer connections to separate external keyboards. Some models of laptop computers have a detachable keyboard, which allows the system to be configured as a touch-screen tablet. They are sometimes called 2-in-1 detachable laptops or tablet-laptop hybrids.[39]
Mobile phones are designed to have an extended battery life and light weight, while having less functionality than larger computers. They have diverse hardware architecture, often including antennas, microphones, cameras, GPS devices, and speakers. Power and data connections vary between phones.[40]
Large-scale computers

An IBM System z9 mainframe
A mainframe computer is a much larger computer that typically fills a room and may cost many hundreds or thousands of times as much as a personal computer. They are designed to perform large numbers of calculations for governments and large enterprises.
In the 1960s and 1970s, more and more departments started to use cheaper and dedicated systems for specific purposes like process control and laboratory automation. A minicomputer, or colloquially mini, is a class of smaller computers that was developed in the mid-1960s[41][42] and sold for much less than mainframe[43] and mid-size computers from IBM and its direct competitors.
Supercomputers can cost hundreds of millions of dollars. They are intended to maximize performance with floating-point arithmetic and running batch programs that take a very long time (such as weeks) to complete. As a result of the need for communication between parallel programs, the speed of the internal network must be prioritized.[44]
Warehouse scale computers are larger versions of cluster computers that came into fashion with software as a service provided via the internet. Their design is intended to minimize cost per operation and power usage, as they can cost over $100 million for a warehouse and the computers which go inside (the computers must be replaced every few years). Although availability is crucial for SaaS products, the software is designed to compensate for availability failures—unlike supercomputers.[44]
Virtual hardware
Virtual hardware is software that mimics the function of hardware; it is commonly used in infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and platform as a Service (PaaS).[45]

Embedded system
Embedded systems have the most variation in their processing power and cost: from an 8-bit processor that could cost less than USD$0.10, to higher-end processors capable of billions of operations per second and costing over USD$100. Cost is a particular concern with these systems, with designers often choosing the cheapest option that satisfies the performance requirements.[46]

Components
Case
Main article: Computer case
A computer case encloses most of the components of a desktop computer system. It provides mechanical support and protection for internal elements such as the motherboard, disk drives, and power supply, and controls and directs the flow of cooling air over internal components. The case is also part of the system to control electromagnetic interference radiated by the computer and protects internal parts from electrostatic discharge. Large tower cases provide space for multiple disk drives or other peripherals and usually stand on the floor, while desktop cases provide less expansion room. All-in-one style designs include a video display built into the same case. Portable and laptop computers require cases that provide impact protection for the unit. Hobbyists may decorate the cases with colored lights, paint, or other features, in an activity called case modding.

Power supply
Main article: Power supply unit
Most personal computer power supply units meet the ATX standard and convert from alternating current (AC) at between 120 and 277 volts provided from a power outlet to direct current (DC) at a much lower voltage: typically 12, 5, or 3.3 volts.[47]

Motherboard

Computer motherboard
Main article: Motherboard
The motherboard is the main component of a computer. It is a board with integrated circuitry that connects the other parts of the computer including the CPU, the RAM, the disk drives (CD, DVD, hard disk, or any others) as well as any peripherals connected via the ports or the expansion slots. The integrated circuit (IC) chips in a computer typically contain billions of tiny metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs).[48]

Components directly attached to or to part of the motherboard include:

At least one CPU (central processing unit), which performs most of the calculations that enable a computer to function.[49] It can be informally referred to as the brain of the computer.[50] It takes program instructions from random-access memory (RAM), interprets and processes them and then sends back results so that the relevant components can carry out the instructions. The CPU is a microprocessor, which is fabricated on a metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) integrated circuit (IC) chip. It is usually cooled by a heatsink and fan, or water-cooling system. Many newer CPUs include an on-die graphics processing unit (GPU). The clock speed of the CPU governs how fast it executes instructions and is measured in GHz; typical values lie between 1 GHz and 5 GHz.[citation needed] There is also an increasing trend to add more cores to a processor—with each acting as if it were an independent processor—for increased parallelism.[50]
The internal bus connects the CPU to the main memory with several lines for simultaneous communication—typically 50 to 100—which are separated into those for addressing or memory, data, and command or control.[51] Although parallel buses used to be more common, serial buses with a serializer to send more information over the same wire have become more common in the twenty-first century.[52] Computers with multiple processors will need an interconnection bus, usually managed by a northbridge, while the southbridge manages communication with slower peripheral and I/O devices.[53]
Random-access memory (RAM), which stores the code and data that are being actively accessed by the CPU in a hierarchy based on when it is expected to be next used. Registers are closest to the CPU but have very limited capacity.[54] CPUs also typically have multiple areas of cache memory that have much more capacity than registers, but much less than main memory; they are slower to access than registers, but much faster than main memory.[55] Caching works by prefetching data before the CPU needs it, reducing latency.[55][56] If the data the CPU needs is not in the cache, it can be accessed from main memory.[55] Cache memory is typically SRAM, while the main memory is typically DRAM.[27] RAM is volatile, meaning its contents will disappear if the computer powers down.[57]
Permanent storage or non-volatile memory is typically higher capacity and cheaper than memory, but takes much longer to access. Historically, such storage was typically provided in the form of a hard drive, but solid-state drives (SSD) are becoming cheaper and are much faster, thus leading to their increasing adoption. USB drives and network or cloud storage are also options.[58]
Read-only memory (ROM), which stores the BIOS that runs when the computer is powered on or otherwise begins execution, a process known as Bootstrapping, or booting or booting up.[citation needed] The ROM is typically a nonvolatile BIOS memory chip, which can only be written once with special technology.[59]
The BIOS (Basic Input Output System) includes boot firmware and power management firmware. Newer motherboards use Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) instead of BIOS.
The CMOS (complementary MOS) battery, which powers the CMOS memory for date and time in the BIOS chip. This battery is generally a watch battery.
Power MOSFETs make up the voltage regulator module (VRM), which controls how much voltage other hardware components receive.[60]
Expansion cards
Main article: Expansion card
An expansion card in computing is a printed circuit board that can be inserted into an expansion slot of a computer motherboard or backplane to add functionality to a computer system via the expansion bus. Expansion cards can be used to obtain or expand on features not offered by the motherboard.[61] Using expansion cards for a video processor used to be common, but modern computers are more likely to instead have a GPU integrated into the motherboard.[62]

Input/output
Main article: Peripheral
Most computers also have an external data bus to connect peripheral devices to the motherboard. Most commonly, Universal Serial Bus (USB) is used.[63] Unlike the internal bus, the external bus is connected using a bus controller that allows the peripheral system to operate at a different speed from the CPU.[63] Input and output devices are used to receive data from the external world or write data respectively. Common examples include keyboards and mice (input) and displays and printers (output). Network interface controllers are used to access the Internet.[64] USB ports also allow power to connected devices—a standard USB supplies power at 5 volts and up to 500 milliamps (2.5 watts), while powered USB ports with additional pins may allow the delivery of more power—up to 6 amps at 24v.[65]

Sales
Global revenue from computer hardware in 2023 reached $705.17 billion.[66]

Recycling
Main article: Computer recycling
Because computer parts contain hazardous materials, there is a growing movement to recycle old and outdated parts.[67] Computer hardware contain dangerous chemicals such as lead, mercury, nickel, and cadmium. According to the EPA these e-wastes have a harmful effect on the environment unless they are disposed of properly. Making hardware requires energy, and recycling parts will reduce air pollution, water pollution, as well as greenhouse gas emissions.[68] Disposing unauthorized computer equipment is in fact illegal. Legislation makes it mandatory to recycle computers through the government approved facilities. Recycling a computer can be made easier by taking out certain reusable parts. For example, the RAM, DVD drive, the graphics card, hard drive or SSD, and other similar removable parts can be reused.

Many materials used in computer hardware can be recovered by recycling for use in future production. Reuse of tin, silicon, iron, aluminum, and a variety of plastics that are present in bulk in computers or other electronics can reduce the costs of constructing new systems. Components frequently contain copper, gold, tantalum,[69][70] silver, platinum, palladium, and lead as well as other valuable materials suitable for reclamation.[71][72]

Toxic computer components
The central processing unit contains many toxic materials. It contains lead and chromium in the metal plates. Resistors, semiconductors, infrared detectors, stabilizers, cables, and wires contain cadmium. The circuit boards in a computer contain mercury, and chromium.[73] When these types of materials, and chemicals are disposed improperly will become hazardous for the environment.

Environmental effects
When e-waste byproducts leach into groundwater, are burned, or get mishandled during recycling, it causes harm. Health problems associated with such toxins include impaired mental development, cancer, and damage to the lungs, liver, and kidneys.[74] Computer components contain many toxic substances, like dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), cadmium, chromium, radioactive isotopes and mercury. Circuit boards contain considerable quantities of lead-tin solders that are more likely to leach into groundwater or create air pollution due to incineration.[75]

Recycling of computer hardware is considered environmentally friendly because it prevents hazardous waste, including heavy metals and carcinogens, from entering the atmosphere, landfill or waterways. While electronics consist a small fraction of total waste generated, they are far more dangerous. There is stringent legislation designed to enforce and encourage the sustainable disposal of appliances, the most notable being the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive of the European Union and the United States National Computer Recycling Act.[76]

Efforts for minimizing computer hardware waste
E-cycling, the recycling of computer hardware, refers to the donation, reuse, shredding and general collection of used electronics. Generically, the term refers to the process of collecting, brokering, disassembling, repairing and recycling the components or metals contained in used or discarded electronic equipment, otherwise known as electronic waste (e-waste). E-cyclable items include, but are not limited to: televisions, computers, microwave ovens, vacuum cleaners, telephones and cellular phones, stereos, and VCRs and DVDs just about anything that has a cord, light or takes some kind of battery.[77]

Some companies, such as Dell and Apple, will recycle computers of their make or any other make. Otherwise, a computer can be donated to Computer Aid International which is an organization that recycles and refurbishes old computers for hospitals, schools, universities, etc.[78]

See also
icon	Electronics portal
Computer architecture
Electronic hardware
Hardware for artificial intelligence
Glossary of computer hardware terms
History of computing hardware
Microprocessor
MOSFET
List of computer hardware manufacturers
Open-source computing hardware
Open-source hardware
Transistor
References
 "Parts of computer". Microsoft. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 5 December 2013.
 Gilster, Ron (2001). PC hardware : a beginner's guide. Internet Archive. New York; London : McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-212990-8.
 Blum 2011, p. 13–14.
 Blum 2011, p. 14.
 Blum 2011, p. 15.
 Blum 2011, pp. 21, 23.
 Blum 2011, p. 25.
 Blum 2011, pp. 34–35.
 Blum 2011, pp. 71–72.
 Blum 2011, p. 72.
 Blum 2011, pp. 72, 74.
 Blum 2011, p. 74.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, pp. 41–42.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 11.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, pp. 27–28, 32.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 27.
 Mendelson 2022, p. 2.
 Mendelson 2022, pp. 2–3.
 Mendelson 2022, p. 3.
 Mendelson 2022, p. 8.
 Mendelson 2022, p. 15.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 2.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, pp. 17–18.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, pp. 9, 44.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 9.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 15.
 Wang 2021, p. 3.
 Wang 2021, p. 4.
 Wang 2021, pp. 51–52.
 "PC Cooling: The Importance of Keeping Your PC Cool". Intel. Retrieved 20 July 2024.
 "Data Center Cooling: What are the top concepts you need to know?". gatewaymechanical.ca. 11 August 2021. Retrieved 20 July 2024.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 22.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 26.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 25.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 21.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 56.
 PC hardware : a beginner's guide. Osborne/McGraw-Hill. 26 April 2001. pp. 21. ISBN 9780072129908.
 "Desktop computer vs. Laptop computer". Computer Hope. 30 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020.
 Cipriani, Jason (29 May 2020). "Best 2-in-1 Detachable Laptops 2020: The Best Tablet-Laptop Hybrids". IGN. Retrieved 20 July 2020.
 Ahmed, Rizwan; Dharaskar, Rajiv V. (2009). Mobile Forensics: An Introduction from Indian Law Enforcement Perspective. Springer. p. 177. ISBN 978-3-642-00405-6.
 Henderson, Rebecca M.; Newell, Richard G., eds. (2011). Accelerating energy innovation : insights from multiple sectors. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 180. ISBN 978-0226326832.
 Huang, Han-Way (2014). The Atmel AVR microcontroller : MEGA and XMEGA in assembly and C. Australia; United Kingdom: Delmar Cengage Learning. p. 4. ISBN 978-1133607298.
 Estabrooks, Maurice (1995). Electronic technology, corporate strategy, and world transformation. Westport, Conn.: Quorum Books. p. 53. ISBN 0899309690.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 8.
 Wang 2021, pp. 1, 3.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, pp. 8–9.
 Wilson, Kevin (2022). Exploring Computer Hardware: The Illustrated Guide to Understanding Computer Hardware, Components, Peripherals & Networks. Elluminet Press. ISBN 978-1-913151-73-7.
 "13 Sextillion & Counting: The Long & Winding Road to the Most Frequently Manufactured Human Artifact in History". Computer History Museum. 2 April 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2019.
 Wang 2021, p. 8.
 Wang 2021, p. 9.
 Wang 2021, p. 75.
 Wang 2021, p. 78.
 Wang 2021, p. 90.
 Wang 2021, p. 47.
 Wang 2021, pp. 49–50.
 Hennessy & Patterson 2011, p. 45.
 Wang 2021, p. 54.
 Wang 2021, pp. 55–56.
 Wang 2021, p. 55.
 Harding, Scharon (17 September 2019). "What Is a MOSFET? A Basic Definition". Tom's Hardware. Retrieved 7 November 2019.
 "What is an Expansion Card?". Lenovo. Retrieved 17 February 2025.
 Wang 2021, p. 121.
 Wang 2021, p. 74.
 Wang 2021, p. 7.
 Wang 2021, p. 116.
 "Computer Hardware Market Size, Trends and Global Forecast To 2032". The Business Research Company. Retrieved 3 March 2023.
 "How to recycle your old computer". Digital Trends. 18 December 2016. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2017.
 "Newtech Recycling Specializes in Computer Disposal, Laptop Disposal, Desktop Disposal Mainframe Disposal and Server Disposal". Newtech Recycling, Inc. Archived from the original on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2017.
 Robert-Tissot, Sarah (2011). "TANTALUM". Royal Australian Chemical instatute. Archived from the original on 26 February 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2019.
 Padilla, Abraham (February 2019). "TANTALUM" (PDF). United states geological survey. Retrieved 3 March 2019.
 Bleiwas, D (July 2001). "Obsolete Computers, "Gold Mine," or High-Tech Trash? Resource Recovery from Recycling" (PDF). USGS. Retrieved 4 March 2019.
 LeBlanc, Rick. "Electronic Devices a Rich Source of Precious Metals for Recyclers". The Balance Small Business. Retrieved 4 March 2019.
 "The Toxic Components of Computers and Monitors". Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017.
 "What's Going On with Electronic Waste? – Electronics TakeBack Coalition". Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017.
 Toothman, Jessika (2 June 2008). "What Happens to your Discarded Old Computer?". HowStuffWorks.
 National Computer Recycling Act of 2005, H.R. 425, 109th Cong. (2005–2006)
 T. Gallo, Daniel (15 July 2013). "Broad Overview of E-Waste Management Policies in the U.S." (PDF). www.epa.gov. Retrieved 17 January 2020.
 Schofield, Jack (19 February 2015). "How can I safely recycle my old PCs?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017.
Sources
Blum, Edward K. (2011). Computer Science: The Hardware, Software and Heart of It. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 978-1-4614-1168-0.
Hennessy, John L.; Patterson, David A. (2011). Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-12-383873-5.
Mendelson, Avi (2022). "The Architecture". In Anupam Chattopadhyay (ed.). Handbook of Computer Architecture. Springer Nature. pp. 1–42. doi:10.1007/978-981-15-6401-7_1-1. ISBN 978-981-15-6401-7.
Wang, Shuangbao Paul (2021). Computer Architecture and Organization: Fundamentals and Architecture Security. Springer Nature. ISBN 978-981-16-5662-0.
External links
 Media related to Computer hardware at Wikimedia Commons
 Computer hardware at Wikibooks
 Learning materials related to Computer hardware at Wikiversity
vte
Basic computer components
vte
Computer science
vte
Digital electronics
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
GermanyUnited StatesCzech RepublicIsrael
Categories: Computer hardwareDigital electronics
This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 00:10 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Computer hardware

110 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
History
Forms of payment
Payout ratio
Dividend dates
Dividend frequency
Dividend-reinvestment
Law and government policy on dividends

Australia and New Zealand
India
United States and Canada
United Kingdom
Effect on stock price

Criticism and analysis
Tax implications
Other corporate entities

Cooperatives
Trusts
See also
References
External links
Dividend

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the financial concept and is not to be confused with Dividend (mathematics).
Part of a series on
Accounting
Early 19th-century German ledger
Constant purchasing powerHistorical costManagementTax
Major types
Key concepts
Selected accounts
Accounting standards
Financial statements
Bookkeeping
Auditing
People and organizations
Development
Misconduct
vte
A dividend is a distribution of profits by a corporation to its shareholders, after which the stock exchange decreases the price of the stock by the dividend to remove volatility. The market has no control over the stock price on open on the ex-dividend date, though more often than not it may open higher.[1] When a corporation earns a profit or surplus, it is able to pay a portion of the profit as a dividend to shareholders. Any amount not distributed is taken to be re-invested in the business (called retained earnings). The current year profit as well as the retained earnings of previous years are available for distribution; a corporation is usually prohibited from paying a dividend out of its capital. Distribution to shareholders may be in cash (usually by bank transfer) or, if the corporation has a dividend reinvestment plan, the amount can be paid by the issue of further shares or by share repurchase. In some cases, the distribution may be of assets.

The dividend received by a shareholder is income of the shareholder and may be subject to income tax (see dividend tax). The tax treatment of this income varies considerably between jurisdictions. The corporation does not receive a tax deduction for the dividends it pays.[2]

A dividend is allocated as a fixed amount per share, with shareholders receiving a dividend in proportion to their shareholding. Dividends can provide at least temporarily stable income and raise morale among shareholders, but are not guaranteed to continue. For the joint-stock company, paying dividends is not an expense; rather, it is the division of after-tax profits among shareholders. Retained earnings (profits that have not been distributed as dividends) are shown in the shareholders' equity section on the company's balance sheet – the same as its issued share capital. Public companies usually pay dividends on a fixed schedule, but may cancel a scheduled dividend, or declare an unscheduled dividend at any time, sometimes called a special dividend to distinguish it from the regular dividends. (more usually a special dividend is paid at the same time as the regular dividend, but for a one-off higher amount). Cooperatives, on the other hand, allocate dividends according to members' activity, so their dividends are often considered to be a pre-tax expense.

The usually fixed payments to holders of preference shares (or preferred stock in American English) are classed as dividends. The word dividend comes from the Latin word dividendum ("thing to be divided").[3]

History
Further information: Financial history of the Dutch Republic and Dutch East India Company
The Dutch East India Company (VOC) was the first recorded (public) company to pay regular dividends.[4][5] The VOC paid annual dividends worth around 18 percent of the value of the shares for almost 200 years of existence (1602–1800).[6]

In common law jurisdictions, courts have typically refused to intervene in companies' dividend policies, giving directors wide discretion as to the declaration or payment of dividends. The principle of non-interference was established in the Canadian case of Burland v Earle (1902), the British case of Bond v Barrow Haematite Steel Co (1902), and the Australian case of Miles v Sydney Meat-Preserving Co Ltd (1912). However in Sumiseki Materials Co Ltd v Wambo Coal Pty Ltd (2013) the Supreme Court of New South Wales broke with this precedent and recognised a shareholder's contractual right to a dividend.[7]

Forms of payment
Cash dividends are the most common form of payment and are paid out in currency, usually via electronic funds transfer or a printed paper check. Such dividends are a form of investment income of the shareholder, usually treated as earned in the year they are paid (and not necessarily in the year a dividend was declared). For each share owned, a declared amount of money is distributed. Thus, if a person owns 100 shares and the cash dividend is 50 cents per share, the holder of the stock will be paid $50. Dividends paid are not classified as an expense, but rather a deduction of retained earnings. Dividends paid does not appear on an income statement, but does appear on the balance sheet.

Different classes of stocks have different priorities when it comes to dividend payments. Preferred stocks have priority claims on a company's income. A company must pay dividends on its preferred shares before distributing income to common share shareholders.

Stock or scrip dividends are those paid out in the form of additional shares of the issuing corporation, or another corporation (such as its subsidiary corporation). They are usually issued in proportion to shares owned (for example, for every 100 shares of stock owned, a 5% stock dividend will yield 5 extra shares).

Nothing tangible will be gained if the stock is split because the total number of shares increases, lowering the price of each share, without changing the total value of the shares held. (See also Stock dilution.)

Stock dividend distributions do not affect the market capitalization of a company.[8][9] Stock dividends are not includable in the gross income of the shareholder for US income tax purposes. Because the shares are issued for proceeds equal to the pre-existing market price of the shares; there is no negative dilution in the amount recoverable.[10][11]

Property dividends or dividends in specie (Latin for "in kind") are those paid out in the form of assets from the issuing corporation or another corporation, such as a subsidiary corporation. They are relatively rare and most frequently are securities of other companies owned by the issuer, however, they can take other forms, such as products and services.

Interim dividends are dividend payments made before a company's Annual General Meeting (AGM) and final financial statements. This declared dividend usually accompanies the company's interim financial statements.

Other dividends can be used in structured finance. Financial assets with known market value can be distributed as dividends; warrants are sometimes distributed in this way. For large companies with subsidiaries, dividends can take the form of shares in a subsidiary company. A common technique for "spinning off" a company from its parent is to distribute shares in the new company to the old company's shareholders. The new shares can then be traded independently.[citation needed]

Payout ratio
A dividend payout ratio characterizes how much of a company's earnings (or its cash flow) is paid out in the form of dividends.

Most often, the payout ratio is calculated based on dividends per share and earnings per share:[12]

Payout ratio = ⁠
dividends per share
/
earnings per share
⁠ × 100
A payout ratio greater than 100% means the company paid out more in dividends for the year than it earned.

Since earnings are an accountancy measure, they do not necessarily closely correspond to the actual cash flow of the company. Hence another way to determine the safety of a dividend is to replace earnings in the payout ratio by free cash flow. Free cash flow is the business's operating cash flow minus its capital expenditures: this is a measure of how much incoming cash is "free" to pay out to stockholders and/or to grow the business.

Free cash flow payout ratio = ⁠
dividends per share
/
free cash flow per share
⁠ × 100
A free cash flow payout ratio greater than 100% means the company paid out more cash in dividends for the year than the "free" cash it took in.

Dividend dates
A dividend that is declared must be approved by a company's board of directors before it is paid. For public companies in the US, four dates are relevant regarding dividends:[13] The position in the UK is very similar, except that the expression "in-dividend date" is not used.

Declaration date – the day the board of directors announces its intention to pay a dividend. On that day, a liability is created and the company records that liability on its books; it now owes the money to the shareholders.

In-dividend date – the last day, which is one trading day before the ex-dividend date, where shares are said to be cum dividend ('with [including] dividend'). That is, existing shareholders and anyone who buys the shares on this day will receive the dividend, and any shareholders who have sold the shares lose their right to the dividend. After this date the shares becomes ex dividend.

Ex-dividend date – the day on which shares bought and sold no longer come attached with the right to be paid the most recently declared dividend. In the United States and many European countries, it is typically one trading day before the record date. This is an important date for any company that has many shareholders, including those that trade on exchanges, to enable reconciliation of who is entitled to be paid the dividend. Existing shareholders will receive the dividend even if they sell the shares on or after that date, whereas anyone who bought the shares will not receive the dividend. It is relatively common for a share's price to decrease on the ex-dividend date by an amount roughly equal to the dividend being paid, which reflects the decrease in the company's assets resulting from the payment of the dividend.

Book closure date – when a company announces a dividend, it will also announce the date on which the company will temporarily close its books for share transfers, which is also usually the record date.

Record date – shareholders registered in the company's record as of the record date will be paid the dividend, while shareholders who are not registered as of this date will not receive the dividend. Registration in most countries is essentially automatic for shares purchased before the ex-dividend date.

Payment date – the day on which dividend cheques will actually be mailed to shareholders or the dividend amount credited to their bank account.

Dividend frequency
Typical dividend frequencies for different countries.
Typical dividend frequencies for different countries shown in a dividend calendar
The dividend frequency is the number of dividend payments within a single business year.[14] The most usual dividend frequencies are yearly, semi-annually, quarterly and monthly. Some common dividend frequencies are quarterly in the US, semi-annually in Japan, UK and Australia and annually in Germany.

Dividend-reinvestment
Some companies have dividend reinvestment plans, or DRIPs, not to be confused with scrips. DRIPs allow shareholders to use dividends to systematically buy small amounts of stock, usually with no commission and sometimes at a slight discount. In some cases, the shareholder might not need to pay taxes on these re-invested dividends, but in most cases they do. Utilizing a DRIP is a powerful investment tool because it takes advantage of both dollar cost averaging and compounding. Dollar cost averaging is the principle of investing a set amount of capital at recurring intervals. In this case, if the dividend is paid quarterly, then every quarter you are investing a set amount (the number of shares you own multiplied by the dividend per share). By doing this, you buy more shares when the price is low and fewer when the price is high. Additionally, the fractional shares that are purchased then begin paying dividends, compounding your investment and increasing the number of shares and total dividend earned each time a dividend distribution is made.

Law and government policy on dividends
Main article: Dividend tax
Governments may adopt policies on dividend distribution for the protection of shareholders and the preservation of company viability, as well as treating dividends as a potential source of revenue.[15]

Most countries impose a corporate tax on the profits made by a company. Many jurisdictions also impose a tax on dividends paid by a company to its shareholders (stockholders), but the tax treatment of a dividend income varies considerably between jurisdictions. The primary tax liability is that of the shareholder, although a tax obligation may also be imposed on the corporation in the form of a withholding tax. In some cases, the withholding tax may be the extent of the tax liability in relation to the dividend. A dividend tax is in addition to any tax imposed directly on the corporation on its profits.[16]

A dividend paid by a company is not an expense of the company.

Australia and New Zealand
Australia and New Zealand have a dividend imputation system, wherein companies can attach franking credits or imputation credits to dividends. These franking credits represent the tax paid by the company upon its pre-tax profits. One dollar of company tax paid generates one franking credit. Companies can attach any proportion of franking up to a maximum amount that is calculated from the prevailing company tax rate: for each dollar of dividend paid, the maximum level of franking is the company tax rate divided by (1 − company tax rate). At the current 30% rate, this works out at 0.30 of a credit per 70 cents of dividend, or 42.857 cents per dollar of dividend. The shareholders who are able to use them, apply these credits against their income tax bills at a rate of a dollar per credit, thereby effectively eliminating the double taxation of company profits.

India
In India, a company declaring or distributing dividends is required to pay a Corporate Dividend Tax in addition to the tax levied on their income. The dividend received by the shareholders is then exempt in their hands. Dividend-paying firms in India fell from 24 percent in 2001 to almost 19 percent in 2009 before rising to 19 percent in 2010.[17] However, dividend income over and above ₹1,000,000 attracts 10 percent dividend tax in the hands of the shareholder with effect from April 2016.[18] Since the Budget 2020–2021, DDT has been abolished. Now, the Indian government taxes dividend income in the hands of investor according to income tax slab rates.

United States and Canada
The United States and Canada impose a lower tax rate on dividend income than ordinary income, on the assertion that company profits had already been taxed as corporate tax. In the United States, shareholders of corporations face double taxation – taxes on both corporate profits and taxes on distribution of dividends.

United Kingdom
The rules in Part 23 of the Companies Act 2006 (sections 829–853) govern the payment of dividends to shareholders. The Act refers in this section to "distribution", covering any kind of distribution of a company's assets to its members (with some exceptions), "whether in cash or otherwise". A company is only able to make a distribution out of its accumulated, realised profits, "so far as not previously utilised by distribution or capitalisation, less its accumulated, realised losses, so far as not previously written off in a reduction or reorganisation of capital duly made".[19]

The United Kingdom government announced in 2018 that it was considering a review of the existing rules on dividend distribution following a consultation exercise on insolvency and corporate governance. The aim was to address concerns which had emerged where companies in financial distress were still able to distribute "significant dividends" to their shareholders.[15] A requirement has been proposed under which the largest companies would be required to publish a distribution policy statement covering dividend distribution.[20]

The law in England and Wales regarding dividend payment was clarified in 2018 by the England and Wales Court of Appeal in the case of Global Corporate Ltd v Hale [2018] EWCA Civ 2618. Certain payments made to a director/shareholder had been treated by the High Court as quantum meruit payments to Hale in his capacity as a company director but the Appeal Court reversed this judgment and treated the payments as dividends. At the time of payment they had been treated as "dividends" payable from an anticipated profit. The company subsequently went into liquidation; an attempt to recharacterise the payments as payments for services rendered was held to be unlawful.[21]

Effect on stock price
After a stock goes ex-dividend (when a dividend has just been paid, so there is no anticipation of another imminent dividend payment), the stock price should drop.

To calculate the amount of the drop, the traditional method is to view the financial effects of the dividend from the perspective of the company. Since the company has paid say £x in dividends per share out of its cash account on the left hand side of the balance sheet, the equity account on the right side should decrease an equivalent amount. This means that a £x dividend should result in a £x drop in the share price.

A more accurate method of calculating the fall in price is to look at the share price and dividend from the after-tax perspective of a shareholder. The after-tax drop in the share price (or capital gain/loss) should be equivalent to the after-tax dividend. For example, if the tax of capital gains Tcg is 35%, and the tax on dividends Td is 15%, then a £1 dividend is equivalent to £0.85 of after-tax money. To get the same financial benefit from a, the after-tax capital loss value should equal £0.85. The pre-tax capital loss would be ⁠
£0.85
/
1 − Tcg
⁠ = ⁠
£0.85
/
1 − 0.35
⁠ = ⁠
£0.85
/
0.65
⁠ = £1.31. In this case, a dividend of £1 has led to a larger drop in the share price of £1.31, because the tax rate on capital losses is higher than the dividend tax rate. However in many countries the stock market is dominated by institutions which pay no additional tax on dividends received (as opposed to tax on overall profits). If that is the case, then the share price should fall by the full amount of the dividend.

Finally, security analysis that does not take dividends into account may mute the decline in share price, for example in the case of a price–earnings ratio target that does not back out cash; or amplify the decline when comparing different periods.

The effect of a dividend payment on share price is an important reason why it can sometimes be desirable to exercise an American option early.

Criticism and analysis
Some[who?] believe company profits are best re-invested in the company with actions such as research and development, capital investment or expansion. Proponents of this view (and thus critics of dividends per se) suggest that an eagerness to return profits to shareholders may indicate the management having run out of good ideas for the future of the company. A counter-argument to this position came from Peter Lynch of Fidelity investments, who declared: "One strong argument in favor of companies that pay dividends is that companies that don’t pay dividends have a sorry history of blowing the money on a string of stupid diworseifications";[22] using his self-created term for diversification that results in worse effects, not better. Additionally, studies have demonstrated that companies that pay dividends have higher earnings growth, suggesting dividend payments may be evidence of confidence in earnings growth and sufficient profitability to fund future expansion.[23] Benjamin Graham and David Dodd wrote in Securities Analysis (1934): "The prime purpose of a business corporation is to pay dividends to its owners. A successful company is one that can pay dividends regularly and presumably increase the rate as time goes on."[24]

Other studies indicate that dividend-paying stocks tend to offer superior long-term performance relative to the overall market at least in developed economies,[25][26] relative to a stock index such as the S&P 500[27][28] or Dow Jones Industrial Average[29] or relative to stocks that do not pay dividends.[28][30] Several explanations have been proposed for this outperformance such as dividends being associated with value stocks which are themselves associated with long-term outperformance;[31] being more durable in crashes or bear markets;[32][33] being associated with profitable companies exhibiting high levels of free cashflow; and being associated with mature, unfashionable companies that are overlooked by many investors and thus an effective contrarian strategy.[34][35] Asset managers at Tweedy, Browne[36] and Capital Group[37] have suggested dividends are an effective measure of a given company's overall financial status.

Shareholders in companies that pay little or no cash dividends can potentially reap the benefit of the company's profits when they sell their shareholding, or when a company is wound down and all assets liquidated and distributed amongst shareholders. However, data from professor Jeremy Siegel found stocks that do not pay dividends tend to have worse long-term performance, as a group, than the general stock market and also perform worse than dividend-paying stocks.[35]

Tax implications
Taxation of dividends is often used as justification for retaining earnings, or for performing a stock buyback, in which the company buys back stock, thereby increasing the value of the stock left outstanding.

When dividends are paid, individual shareholders in many countries suffer from double taxation of those dividends:

the company pays income tax to the government when it earns any income, and then
when the dividend is paid, the individual shareholder pays income tax on the dividend payment.
In many countries, the tax rate on dividend income is lower than for other forms of income to compensate for tax paid at the corporate level.

A capital gain should not be confused with a dividend. Generally, a capital gain occurs where a capital asset is sold for an amount greater than the amount of its cost at the time the investment was purchased. A dividend is a parsing out a share of the profits, and is taxed at the dividend tax rate. If there is an increase of value of stock, and a shareholder chooses to sell the stock, the shareholder will pay a tax on capital gains (often taxed at a lower rate than ordinary income). If a holder of the stock chooses to not participate in the buyback, the price of the holder's shares could rise (as well as it could fall), but the tax on these gains is delayed until the sale of the shares.

Certain types of specialized investment companies (such as a REIT in the U.S.) allow the shareholder to partially or fully avoid double taxation of dividends.

Other corporate entities
Cooperatives
Cooperative businesses may retain their earnings, or distribute part or all of them as dividends to their members. They distribute their dividends in proportion to their members' activity, instead of the value of members' shareholding. Therefore, co-op dividends are often treated as pre-tax expenses. In other words, local tax or accounting rules may treat a dividend as a form of customer rebate or a staff bonus to be deducted from turnover before profit (tax profit or operating profit) is calculated.

Consumers' cooperatives allocate dividends according to their members' trade with the co-op. For example, a credit union will pay a dividend to represent interest on a saver's deposit. A retail co-op store chain may return a percentage of a member's purchases from the co-op, in the form of cash, store credit, or equity. This type of dividend is sometimes known as a patronage dividend or patronage refund, as well as being informally named divi or divvy.[38][39][40]

Producer cooperatives, such as worker cooperatives, allocate dividends according to their members' contribution, such as the hours they worked or their salary.[41]

Trusts
In real estate investment trusts and royalty trusts, the distributions paid often will be consistently greater than the company earnings. This can be sustainable because the accounting earnings do not recognize any increasing value of real estate holdings and resource reserves. If there is no economic increase in the value of the company's assets then the excess distribution (or dividend) will be a return of capital and the book value of the company will have shrunk by an equal amount. This may result in capital gains which may be taxed differently from dividends representing distribution of earnings.

The distribution of profits by other forms of mutual organization also varies from that of joint-stock companies, though may not take the form of a dividend.

In the case of mutual insurance, for example, in the United States, a distribution of profits to holders of participating life policies is called a dividend. These profits are generated by the investment returns of the insurer's general account, in which premiums are invested and from which claims are paid.[42] The participating dividend may be used to decrease premiums, or to increase the cash value of the policy.[43] Some life policies pay nonparticipating dividends. As a contrasting example, in the United Kingdom, the surrender value of a with-profits policy is increased by a bonus, which also serves the purpose of distributing profits. Life insurance dividends and bonuses, while typical of mutual insurance, are also paid by some joint stock insurers.

Insurance dividend payments are not restricted to life policies. For example, general insurer State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company can distribute dividends to its vehicle insurance policyholders.[44]

See also
Citizen's dividend
Common stock dividend
CSS dividend policy
Direct debit dividend contributions
Dividend policy
Dividend puzzle
Dividend units
Dividend yield
Employee stock ownership
Freedom dividend
Liquidating dividend
Qualified dividend
Social dividend
References
 Frank, Murray; Jagannathan, Ravi (15 February 1998). "Why do stock prices drop by less than the value of the dividend? Evidence from a country without taxes". Journal of Financial Economics. 47 (2): 161–188. doi:10.1016/S0304-405X(97)80053-0. ISSN 0304-405X.
 Meritt, Cam. "Corporate Taxation When Issuing Dividends". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 9 March 2019.
 "dividend". Online Etymology Dictionary. Douglas Harper. 2001. Retrieved 9 November 2006.
 Freedman, Roy S.: Introduction to Financial Technology. (Academic Press, 2006, ISBN 0123704782)
 DK Publishing (Dorling Kindersley): The Business Book (Big Ideas Simply Explained). (2014, ISBN 1465415858)
 Chambers, Clem (14 July 2006). "Who needs stock exchanges?". Mondo Visione. Retrieved 14 May 2017.
 du Plessis, Jean; Alevras, Stephen (2014). "A shareholder's contractual right to a dividend and a company's oppressive conduct in withholding dividend payments: Sumiseki Materials Co Ltd v Wambo Coal Pty Ltd". Companies and Securities Law Journal. 32. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 November 2022.
 "Stock Splits and Stock Dividends Management". PrinciplesofAccounting.com.
 Chen, James (30 June 2023). "Stock Dividend". Investopedia.
 "Exhibit 5" (PDF). SEC.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 "Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(D) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934" (PDF). Kinder Morgan. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 January 2011.
 CFA, Elvis Picardo (25 November 2003). "Payout Ratio". Investopedia. Retrieved 4 August 2018.
 "SEC.gov – Ex-Dividend Dates: When Are You Entitled to Stock and Cash Dividends". www.sec.gov.
 Investopedia Staff (7 June 2007). "Dividend Frequency". Investopedia. Retrieved 4 August 2018.
 Bunney, J., Government plans overhaul of dividend framework, Croner-i Accountancy Daily, published 7 September 2018, accessed 23 August 2023
 Harris, Trevor S.; Hubbard, R.Glenn; Kemsley, Deen (March 2001). "The share price effects of dividend taxes and tax imputation credits" (PDF). Journal of Public Economics. 79 (3): 569–596. doi:10.1016/S0047-2727(00)00076-1.
 "Definition of 'Dividend'". The Economic Times. Retrieved 8 June 2017.
 Modak, Samie (3 March 2016). "Companies rush to announce dividends to avoid tax outgo in April". Business Standard India. Retrieved 31 October 2020.
 UK Legislation, Companies Act 2006: Part 23, accessed 26 October 2023
 Department for Business and Trade, Corporate reporting: The Draft Companies (Strategic Report and Directors' Report) (Amendment) Regulations 2023, published 19 July 2023, accessed 23 August 2023
 Mayer Brown, English Court of Appeal provides clarification regarding the regulation of dividend payments to shareholders, published January 2019, accessed 26 October 2023
 Lynch & Rothschild (1989); chapter 13
 Robert D. Arnott & Clifford S. Asness (January–February 2003). "Surprise! Higher Dividends equal Higher Earnings Growth". Financial Analysts Journal. SSRN 390143.
 Benjamin Graham and David Dodd (1934; Sixth Edition, 2009). McGraw-Hill, p. 367
 A. Michael Keppler. The Importance of Dividend Yields in Country Selection. Financial Analyst Journal, Winter 1991
 Levis, Mario (1 September 1989). "Stock market anomalies: A re-assessment based on the UK evidence". Journal of Banking & Finance. 13 (4): 675–696. doi:10.1016/0378-4266(89)90037-X.
 Siegel (2005) found ranking stocks within the S&P 500 by dividend yield rather than market capitalization, and rebalancing annually, led to long-term outperformance of the overall index by over 2% a year, and even greater outperformance relative to the non-dividend stocks within the S&P 500.
 P.N. Patel, et al., High Yield, Low Payout. Credit Suisse Quantitative Research, August 2006.
 Cai, Renjie. Which one is better: Investing in High Dividend or Low Dividend stocks?. Diss. University of Nevada, Reno, 2014.
 Siegel, 2005
 "Dividend yield is also commonly associated with style investing, with growth stocks characterized as having low dividend yields and value stocks as having high dividend yields. Studies have found that value stocks outperform growth stocks in the long run." Conover, C. Mitchell, Gerald R. Jensen, and Marc W. Simpson. "What difference do dividends make?." Financial Analysts Journal 72.6 (2016): 28–40.
 "Dividend-paying stocks outperform non-dividend-paying stocks by 1 to 2% more per month in declining markets than in advancing markets. These results are economically and statistically significant and robust to many risk adjustments and across industries." Kathleen P. Fuller, Michael A. Goldstein. Do dividends matter more in declining markets? Journal of Corporate Finance, Volume 17, Issue 3. 2011, Pages 457–473, ISSN 0929-1199, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2011.01.001
 "In the wipeout of 1987, the high-dividend payers fared better than the nondividend payers and suffered less than half the decline of the general market." Peter Lynch and John Rothschild (1989) One Up on Wall Street: How To Use What You Already Know To Make Money In The Market Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0671661035; Chapter 13.
 David Dreman (1998). Contrarian Investment Strategies: The Next Generation. Free Press, ISBN 0684813505
 Jeremy Siegel (2005. The Future for Investors: Why the Tried and the True Triumph Over the Bold and the New. Currency, ISBN 140008198X
 In a 2007 report, revised 2014, Tweedy, Browne wrote: "The ability to pay cash dividends is a positive factor in assessing the underlying health of a company and the quality of its earnings. This is particularly pertinent in light of the complexity of corporate accounting and numerous examples of “earnings management,” including occasionally fraudulent earnings manipulation."
 In a 2024 interview, Jody Johnsson of Capital Group stated: "... I think dividends are a very important signal of financial health and of management discipline. How management thinks about the dividend and how they think about the need to generate consistent cash flow in order to pay it is very important."
 "Ace Hardware, Form 10-K405, Filing Date Mar 22, 2001". secdatabase.com. Retrieved 14 May 2018.
 "Co-op pays out £19.6m in 'divi'". BBC News via bbc.co.uk. 28 June 2007. Retrieved 15 May 2008.
 Nikola Balnave & Greg Patmore. "The History Cooperative – Conference Proceedings – ASSLH – Rochdale consumer co-operatives and Australian labour history". Archived from the original on October 4, 2008.
 Norris, Sue (3 March 2007). "Cooperatives pay big dividends". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 June 2009.
 "What Are Dividends?". New York Life. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008. Retrieved 29 April 2008. In short, the portion of the premium determined not to have been necessary to provide coverage and benefits, to meet expenses, and to maintain the company's financial position, is returned to policyowners in the form of dividends.
 Hoboken, NJ (2002). "24, Investment-Oriented Life Insurance". In Fabozzi, Frank J. (ed.). Handbook of Financial Instruments. Wiley. p. 591. ISBN 978-0-471-22092-3. OCLC 52323583.
 "State Farm Announces $1.25 Billion Mutual Auto Policyholder Dividend". State Farm. 1 March 2007.
External links

Look up dividend in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Ex-Dividend Dates: When Are You Entitled to Stock and Cash Dividends – U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
Why Should Companies Pay Dividends?
Dividend Policy Archived 16 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine from studyfinance.com at the University of Arizona
The new U.S. dividend tax cut traps from Tennessee CPA Journal, Nov. 2004
Learn Strategy to Earn Money from Dividends
vte
Financial markets
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: DividendsShareholdersDutch inventionsCorporate development
This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 00:11 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Dividend

63 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Derivation
Critics' views of criticism
Social and political critics
Online critics
Cinematography and television
Responses to critics
See also
References
Critic

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Critic (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Critique.

Critic by Lajos Tihanyi. Oil on canvas, c. 1916.
A critic is a person who communicates an assessment and an opinion of various forms of creative works such as art, literature, music, cinema, theater, fashion, architecture, and food. Critics may also take as their subject social or government policy. Critical judgments, whether derived from critical thinking or not, weigh up a range of factors, including an assessment of the extent to which the item under review achieves its purpose and its creator's intention and a knowledge of its context. They may also include a positive or negative personal response.

Characteristics of a good critic are articulateness, preferably having the ability to use language with a high level of appeal and skill. Sympathy, sensitivity and insight are also important. Form, style and medium are all considered by the critic. In architecture and food criticism, the item's function, value and cost may be added components.

Critics are publicly accepted and, to a significant degree, followed because of the quality of their assessments or their reputation. Influential critics of art, music, theater and architecture often present their arguments in complete books. One very famous example is John Ruskin's Seven Lamps of Architecture and The Stones of Venice. Critics may base their assessment on a range of theoretical positions. For instance, they may take a feminist or Freudian perspective.[1]

Unlike other individuals who may editorialize on subjects via websites or letters written to publications, professional critics are paid to produce their assessment and opinions for print, radio, magazine, television, or Internet companies. When their personal opinion outweighs considered judgment, people who give opinions, whether on current events, public affairs, sports, media or art are often referred to as "pundits" instead of critics.

Critics are themselves subject to competing critics, since the final critical judgment always entails subjectivity. An established critic can play a powerful role as a public arbiter of taste or opinion. Also, critics or a coordinated group of critics, may award symbols of recognition.

Derivation
The word "critic" comes from Greek κριτικός (kritikós) 'able to discern',[2] which is a Greek derivation of the word κριτής (krités), meaning a person who offers reasoned judgment or analysis, value judgment, interpretation or observation.[3] Early English meaning of criticism was based mainly on the criticism of literature and it was in the 17th century that more general forms of criticism began.[citation needed]

Critics' views of criticism
Cultural critic Clement Greenberg wrote that a good critic excels through "insights into the evidence ... and by ... loyalty to the relevant"; poet and critic T.S. Eliot wrote "a critic must have a very highly developed sense of fact".[4]

In 1971, Harold C. Schonberg, chief music critic of The New York Times from 1960 to 1980, said that he wrote for himself, "not necessarily for readers, not for musicians. ... It's not a critic's job to be right or wrong; it's his job to express an opinion in readable English."[5] Schonberg was the first music critic to receive the Pulitzer Prize for criticism.

Daniel Mendelsohn described the equation of criticism for critics as knowledge + taste = meaningful judgement.[6][7]

Restaurant critic Terry Durack explained that from a critic "you hope for a thorough, objective and legitimate discussion" that puts "opera, art or book into context, so that it adds to your own body of knowledge"; in the context of a restaurant criticism, this means it is "not about me liking it or not; it's about me helping you decide whether you are going to like it or not."[8]

Rothko's dilemma was that he wanted to employ the vocabulary of symbolism – the palpitating indeterminate space, the excruciatingly refined colour, the obsession with nuance, the presence of Mallarmé's "negated object" – to render the patriarchal despair and elevation of the Old Testament. Criticism doesn't get sharper, or more sensitive, or more deeply sympathetic to the object, than that.

Robert Hughes (critic) on (artist) Mark Rothko[9]

Social and political critics
Social and political critics have used various forms of art to express their criticism, including literature and music. Pierre Beaumarchais, for example, prior to the French Revolution, used his play The Marriage of Figaro to denounce aristocratic privilege, and a critic's influence is enhanced by subsequent reworkings such as the operatic versions of Beaumarchais's play (The Barber of Seville) by Rossini and (The Marriage of Figaro) by Mozart. August Ahlqvist, a Finnish professor and poet, who highly admired J. L. Runeberg, the national poet of Finland, gave very negative feedback to the entire literary production of the author Aleksis Kivi, when Kivi presented content of the peoples social life in the form of rude realism instead of romanticism.[10][11] Among the most famous social/political criticism in literary form are Jonathan Swift's satire Gulliver's Travels and George Orwell's satire Animal Farm. Some political critics, such as Ai Weiwei use visual art as their medium. Throughout history, political critics have faced higher risks, including the risk of imprisonment or death.[12][13][14][15][16]

Online critics
Several websites have developed for the purpose of compiling or publishing original critical reviews. Examples include Blogcritics, Rotten Tomatoes, and Yelp. According to A. O. Scott, chief film critic for The New York Times, everyone on the Internet is a critic.[17] Some critics like Roger Ebert achieve iconic status in pop culture and become well regarded.[18][19][20]

Cinematography and television
The American film critics Roger Ebert and Gene Siskel collaborated and appeared on television sometimes agreeing on their review of cinematographic works; sometimes they would differ.

Film critics may use star classification to qualify the reviewed works.

Characters depicting critics have been part of some movies, and have been represented in comedies, such as a food critic in the animated fantasy-comedy Ratatouille, and as an art critic in one of the initial parts of the anthology comedy film The History of the World Part I.

Responses to critics
People whose work is the subject of criticism have a full range of responses to it. For example, they may be appreciative, offended, distressed, encouraged, amused or nonplussed.

We do not object to criticism; and we do not expect that the critic will read the book before writing a notice of it. We do not even expect the reviewer of the book will say that he has not read it. No we have no anticipations of anything unusual in this age of criticism.

Satirical comment about potential criticism by Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner in their Preface to the American Edition of their co-authored novel The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today.[21]
See also
Analysis
Art criticism
Art historian
Censorship
Complaint
Connoisseur
Constructive criticism
Critical philosophy
Critical theory
Critical thinking
Critical vocabulary
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Critique
Cultural critic
Film criticism
Food critic
Frankfurt School of social theory
List of chief music critics
Literary criticism
Music journalism
Polemic
Review
Social criticism
Textual criticism
Theatre criticism
Video game criticism
Wine critic
Portals:
icon Arts
 History
 Journalism
 Philosophy
References
 Dolan, Jill (October 24, 2012). The Feminist Spectator as Critic. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0472035199.
 Greek-English Lexicon, at Perseus Archived March 9, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Kritikos, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott.
 Greek-English Lexicon, at Perseus Archived March 8, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Krites, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott.
 Greenberg, Clement (1961). "T.S. Eliot: A Book Review". Art and Culture – Critical Essays. Boston: Beacon Press. p. 239.
 Kozinn, Allan (July 27, 2003). "Harold C. Schonberg, 87, Dies; Won Pulitzer Prize as Music Critic for The Times". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Retrieved March 28, 2016.
 Mendelsohn, Daniel (August 28, 2012). "A Critic's Manifesto". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 Spiegelman, Willard. "Everyone's a Critic". Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 Durack, Terry (December 3, 2016). "The role of a restaurant critic in the digital age". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2016.
 Craven, Peter (December 16, 2015). "The Spectacle of Skill review: The genius of Robert Hughes as critic and writer". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016.
 Sihvo, Hannes (2014). "Kivi, Aleksis (1834–1872)". The National Biography of Finland. Archived from the original on September 27, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2016.
 Liukkonen, Petri (2008). "Kivi, Aleksis (1834–1872)". Authors' Calendar. Archived from the original on February 26, 2020. Retrieved May 9, 2016.
 "HRW Calls for Release of Thai Government Critic". VOA. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 "Zambian opposition leader arrested for 'defaming' President Lungu". africanews.channel. Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 Shah, Saeed; Nauman, Qasim. "Pakistanis Throng Funeral of Man Hanged for Killing Critic of Blasphemy Laws". Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 "Thousands march in Moscow to honor slain Kremlin critic Nemtsov". Reuters. February 28, 2016. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 "Beijing Critic Says Family Detained in China in Internet Crackdown". VOA. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 Scott, A. O. (January 30, 2016). "Everybody's a Critic. And That's How It Should Be". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 Rothman, Lily. "Roger Ebert Statue Unveiled Outside Illinois Theater". Time. Archived from the original on June 13, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 "Man Arrested for Overdue Tom Green Rental From 2002". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 Child, Ben (April 25, 2014). "Statue commemorating thumbs-up film critic Roger Ebert unveiled". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on January 17, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2016.
 Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner (1903). "Preface to the American edition". The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today. Chatto & Windus. p. ix.
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
National	
Germany2United States
Other	
NARA
Categories: CriticismEntertainment occupationsHumanities occupations
This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 19:19 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Critic

44 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Definitions

United Kingdom
North America
Australia
Woodland ecoregions

Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands
Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands
Montane grasslands and shrublands
Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub
Deserts and xeric shrublands
See also
References
External links
Woodland

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Wooded" redirects here. For the racehorse, see Wooded (horse).
This article is about the type of forest. For other uses, see Woodland (disambiguation).

An open woodland in North Lanarkshire, Scotland
A woodland (/ˈwʊdlənd/ ⓘ) is, in the broad sense, land covered with woody plants (trees and shrubs),[1][2] or in a narrow sense, synonymous with wood (or in the U.S., the plurale tantum woods), a low-density forest forming open habitats with plenty of sunlight and limited shade (see differences between British, American and Australian English explained below). Some savannas may also be woodlands, such as savanna woodland, where trees and shrubs form a light canopy.[3]

Woodlands may support an understory of shrubs and herbaceous plants including grasses. Woodland may form a transition to shrubland under drier conditions or during early stages of primary or secondary succession. Higher-density areas of trees with a largely closed canopy that provides extensive and nearly continuous shade are often referred to as forests.

Extensive efforts by conservationist groups have been made to preserve woodlands from urbanization and agriculture. For example, the woodlands of Northwest Indiana have been preserved as part of the Indiana Dunes.[4][5][6]

Definitions
United Kingdom
Woodland is used in British woodland management to mean tree-covered areas which arose naturally and which are then managed. At the same time, forest is usually used in the British Isles to describe plantations, usually more extensive, or hunting Forests, which are a land use with a legal definition and may not be wooded at all.[7] The term ancient woodland is used in British nature conservation to refer to any wooded land that has existed since 1600, and often (though not always) for thousands of years, since the last Ice Age[7] (equivalent to the American term old-growth forest)

North America
Woodlot is a closely related term in American forest management, which refers to a stand of trees generally used for firewood. While woodlots often technically have closed canopies, they are so small that light penetration from the edge makes them ecologically closer to woodland than forest. North American forests vary widely in their ecology and are greatly dependent on abiotic factors such as climate and elevation. Much of the old-growth deciduous and pine-dominated forests of the eastern United States was harvested for lumber, paper pulp, telephone poles, creosote, pitch, and tar.

Australia
In Australia, a woodland is defined as an area with a sparse (10–30%) cover of trees, and an open woodland has a very sparse (<10%) cover. Woodlands are also subdivided into tall woodlands or low woodlands if their trees are over 30 m (98 ft) or under 10 m (33 ft) high, respectively. This contrasts with forests, which have more than 30% of their area covered by trees.[8]

Woodland ecoregions
Main article: Ecoregions
Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands
Main article: Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands

Miombo woodland in Malawi
Afrotropical realm
Angolan miombo woodlands (Angola)
Angolan mopane woodlands (Angola, Namibia)
Central Zambezian miombo woodlands (Angola, Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Tanzania, Zambia)
Eastern miombo woodlands (Mozambique, Tanzania)
Kalahari Acacia-Baikiaea woodlands (Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, Zimbabwe)
Zambezian and mopane woodlands (Botswana, Eswatini, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Zambia, Zimbabwe)
Zambezian Baikiaea woodlands (Angola, Botswana, Namibia, Zambia, Zimbabwe)
Nearctic realm
Madrean pine–oak woodlands (Mexico)
Neotropical realm
Cerrado woodlands and savannas (Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay)
Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands

A dry sclerophyll woodland in western Sydney.

An open woodland in Northern Illinois supporting an herbaceous understory of forbs and grasses
Main article: Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands
Afrotropical realm
Al Hajar montane woodlands (Oman)
Australasian realm
Central Hunter Valley eucalypt forest and woodland (Australia)
Cumberland Plain Woodland (Australia)
Gippsland Plains Grassy Woodland (Australia)
Grey Box Grassy Woodlands (Australia)
Lowland Grassy Woodland (Australia)
New England Peppermint Grassy Woodland (Australia)
Nearctic realm
Central forest–grasslands transition (United States)
Upper Midwest forest–savanna transition (United States)
Palearctic realm
Gissaro-Alai open woodlands (Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan)
Montane grasslands and shrublands
Main article: Montane grasslands and shrublands

Limber Pine woodland in the Toiyabe Range of central Nevada
Afrotropical realm
Angolan Scarp savanna and woodlands (Angola)
Drakensberg alti-montane grasslands and woodlands (Lesotho, South Africa)
Drakensberg montane grasslands, woodlands and forests (Eswatini, Lesotho, South Africa)
East African montane moorlands (Kenya, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda)
Ethiopian montane grasslands and woodlands (Ethiopia)
Nearctic realm
Pinyon–juniper woodland (United States)
Palearctic realm
Kopet Dag woodlands and forest steppe (Iran, Turkmenistan)
Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub
Main article: Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub

Mallee woodland with eucalyptuses and melaleucas in Esperance, Western Australia
Australasian realm
Banksia Woodlands of the Swan Coastal Plain (Australia)
Coolgardie woodlands (Australia)
Mount Lofty woodlands (Australia)
Murray-Darling woodlands and mallee (Australia)
Naracoorte woodlands (Australia)
Southwest Australia woodlands (Australia)
Swan Coastal Plain Shrublands and Woodlands (Australia)
Nearctic realm
California chaparral and woodlands (United States)
California montane chaparral and woodlands (United States)
California interior chaparral and woodlands (United States)

A cedar woodland in Bsharri, Lebanon
Palearctic realm
Canary Islands dry woodlands and forests (Spain)
Eastern Mediterranean conifer–sclerophyllous–broadleaf forests (Turkey, Syria, Israel, Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon)
Mediterranean acacia-argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets (Morocco, Canary Islands)
Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia)
Mediterranean woodlands and forests (Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia)
Southeastern Iberian shrubs and woodlands (Spain)
Deserts and xeric shrublands
Main article: Deserts and xeric shrublands

Sahel woodland in Mali
Afrotropical realm
East Saharan montane xeric woodlands (Chad, Sudan)
Madagascar succulent woodlands (Madagascar)
Somali montane xeric woodlands (Somalia)
Southwestern Arabian montane woodlands (Saudi Arabia, Yemen)
Palearctic realm
Baluchistan xeric woodlands (Afghanistan, Pakistan)
Central Afghan Mountains xeric woodlands (Afghanistan)
Central Asian riparian woodlands (Kazakhstan)
North Saharan steppe and woodlands (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, Western Sahara)
Paropamisus xeric woodlands (Afghanistan)
South Saharan steppe and woodlands (Algeria, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Sudan)
Tibesti-Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands (Chad, Egypt, Libya, Sudan)
West Saharan montane xeric woodlands (Algeria, Mali, Mauritania, Niger)
See also
icon	Trees portal
Agroforestry
Biosphere
Clearcutting
Chase (land)
Deforestation
Dendrology
Dendrometry
Ecological succession
Forest dynamics
Forest migration
Forest pathology
Forestry Commission
Intact forest landscape
Natural environment
Natural landscape
Permaforestry
REDD-plus
Royal Forestry Society
Silviculture
Tree allometry
Tree farm
Wildcrafting
Woodland garden
References
 "Definition of Woodland". Lexico. Archived from the original on January 15, 2020. Retrieved 2020-01-15.
 "Woodland definition and meaning". Collins English Dictionary. Retrieved 2020-01-15.
 Smith, Jeremy M.B.. "savanna". Encyclopedia Britannica, 5 Sep. 2016, https://www.britannica.com/science/savanna/Environment. Accessed 8 February 2023.
 Smith, S.; Mark, S. (2006). "Alice Gray, Dorothy Buell, and Naomi Svihla: Preservationists of Ogden Dunes". The South Shore Journal. 1. Archived from the original on 2012-09-13. Retrieved 2012-06-11.
 Smith, S.; Mark, S. (2009). "The Historical Roots of the Nature Conservancy in the Northwest Indiana/Chicagoland Region: From Science to Preservation". The South Shore Journal. 3. Archived from the original on 2016-01-01. Retrieved 2015-11-22.
 Smith, S.; Mark, S. (2007). "The cultural impact of a museum in a small community: The Hour Glass of Ogden Dunes". The South Shore Journal. 2. Archived from the original on 2012-11-30. Retrieved 2012-06-11.
 Rackham, Oliver (2006). Woodlands (New Naturalist 100). London: HarperCollins. ISBN 9780007202447.
 "A simplified look at Australia's vegetation". Information about Australia's Flora: The Australian Environment. Canberra: Australian National Botanic Gardens and Centre for Australian National Biodiversity Research. 24 December 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2017.
External links
 Media related to Woodlands at Wikimedia Commons
The UK Woodland Trust
Woodland Bond Archived 2013-08-06 at the Wayback Machine
vte
Phytogeography: Vegetation classification
Physiognomy	
Forests, woodlands, arboretumShrublands, heath, scrubs, thickets, fruticetumDwarf-shrubland, subshrublands, dwarf-scrubs, suffruticetumHerbaceous communities, grasslands, steppes, prairies, herbetumSavannas, parklandsScarcely vegetated areas, desert vegetation (Desert, Barren vegetation)
Latitude	
TropicalSubtropicalTemperateSubpolarPolar
Climatic
regime	
Pluvial, rainy, ombrophilousCloudySeasonalDrought
Altitude	
MontaneSubmontaneLowlandCoastal
Leaves	
Loss of leaves Deciduous, caducifoliousSemi-deciduous, semicaducifoliousEvergreen, perennifoliousLeaf hardness Sclerophyll, stiff leavesOrthophyll, hyptiophyll leavesLeaf form Aciculifolious, needle-leavedLatifolious, broad-leaved
Substrate	
Terrestrial vegetationAquatic vegetation RiparianMangroveSwampy
See also	
Biogeographic realmsBiomesFloristic kingdomsPlant habitsPlant life-formsVegetation
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
Spain
Categories: ForestsHabitats
This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 22:42 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Woodland

29 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Importance of play in child development

Social development
Indoor recess
Recess data

Childhood obesity and type 2 diabetes
Timing of recess
Effects on classroom behavior
Restriction of recess as disciplinary action
International recess

United States
Common recess activities
References
External links
Recess (break)

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Netherlands, 1934

Sweden, 2006

Vietnam, 2014
Recess is a general term for a period in which a group of people are temporarily dismissed from their duties.

In education, recess is the American and Australian term (known as break or playtime in the UK), where students have a mid morning snack and play before having lunch after a few more lessons. Typically ten to thirty minutes, in elementary school[1] where students are allowed to leave the school's interior to enter its adjacent outside park where they play on equipment such as slides and swings, play basketball, tetherball, study, make up any missing assignments or talk. Many middle and high schools also offer a recess to provide students with a sufficient opportunity to consume quick snacks, communicate with their peers, visit the restroom, study, and various other activities.

Importance of play in child development
During recess, children play, and learning through play has been long known as a vital aspect of childhood development.[2] Some of the earliest studies of play began with G. Stanley Hall, in the 1890s. These studies sparked an interest in the developmental, mental and behavioral tendencies of babies and children. Current research emphasizes recess as a place for children to "role-play essential social skills" and as an important time in the academic day that "counterbalances the sedentary life at school."[3] Play has also been associated with the healthy development of parent-child bonds, establishing social, emotional and cognitive developmental achievements that assist them in relating with others, and managing stress.

Although no formal education exists during recess, sociologists and psychologists consider recess an integral portion of child development, to teach them the importance of social skills and physical education. Play is essential for children to develop not only their physical abilities, but also their intellectual, social, and moral capabilities.[4] Via play, children can learn about the world around them. Some of the known benefits of recess are that students are more on task during academic activities, have improved memory, are more focused, develop a greater number of neural connections, and that it leads to more physical activity outside of the school setting.[5] Psychomotor learning also gives children clues on how the world around them works as they can physically demonstrate such skills. Children need the freedom to play to learn skills necessary to become competent adults such as coping with stress and problem solving.[6] Through the means of caregiver's observations of children's play, one can identify deficiencies in children's development.[7] While there are many types of play children engage in that all contribute to development, it has been emphasized that free, spontaneous play—the kind that occurs on playgrounds—is the most beneficial type of play.

Recess is key in the development of children. Studies have shown that recess plays a large role in of how children develop their social skills. During recess, children usually play games involving teamwork. On the playground, children use many leadership skills – they educate other children about games to play, take turns, and learn to resolve conflicts while playing these games.[8] The leadership skills promoted throughout recess are how children are able to continue to play the games. Along with developing social skills, recess helps with the development of children's brains. Recess gives the children's brains a chance to "regroup" after a long day of class. Also, the physical activity actually leads to the development of the brain. Brain research has shown a relationship between physical activity and the development of the human brain.[9] Another study supports these findings from the brain research. A school system that dedicated one third of their school day to nonacademic activities – such as recess and physical education – led to improved attitudes and fitness, and improved test scores despite spending less time in the classroom.[9]

Social development
Problem solving is an integral part in child development and free play allows for children to learn to problem solve on their own. Teachers and caregivers can scaffold problem solving through modeling or assisting when a confrontation occurs. Although play should involve adults, adults or caregivers should not control the play because when adults control the play, the children can lose their creativity, leadership, and group skills. Adults should let children create and follow agreed upon rules and only intervene if a serious conflict arises.[10] Problem solving encourages children to compromise and cooperate with each other.[11] The conflict resolution process helps children to attain a vast range of social and emotional skills such as empathy, flexibility, self-awareness, and self-regulation. This vast range or capabilities is often referred to as "emotional intelligence" and is essential to building and maintaining relationships in adult life.[4] Teachers can also view recess as a time to observe children's social and cognitive development skills and be able to develop different activities in the classroom that reflect the children's interests and development.[12] Recess at its core is a social experience for children and as such, plays a significant part in the development of language. Children's intentionality with language during recess is tied closely to navigating the social landscape of the playground. Even as early as preschool, children use language to make group decisions and establish authority or a standing in the social setting of the playground. One researcher states that children use language to "invoke play ideas as their own possessions to manage and control the unfolding play",[13] which engages a bidding war for group leadership. When viewing recess through a language perspective, the individual experience of the playground can vary depending on a willingness to follow other's ideas, and the development of language to modify play as it unfolds.

Indoor recess
Depending on the weather (rain, large amounts of snow, and sometimes in extreme heat or extreme cold), recess might be held indoors. Therefore, it should include creative activities that promote movement of moderate-to-vigorous intensity, whether in a gym or a classroom.[1] Allowing the students to finish work, play any board games or other activities that take more than one to play; this helps to encourage group activity, and some games are also educational. Or, they might play educational computer games or read books. It also may contribute to do something non-educational, to help unwind and de-stress from the daily workload. Sometimes, some classes might watch a film or a TV program.

Recess data
The debate surrounding recess has been around for decades and is still happening today. Some people believe that recess is important, while others argue that eliminating recess will lead to better academic achievement.[14] Educators, parents, and experts are debating the importance of recess and play time in the school day.[15] Data shows that recess has many benefits for students.[16] These benefits include increased health, increased test scores, increased attention and social abilities, as well as better behavior. This is because during this physical activity, students produce dopamine, a neurotransmitter involved in memory and problem-solving.[17] Also, the National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) advocates for unstructured play, including recess. NAEYC recommends play as a way for children to decrease stress and develop socially.[18] But, about 40% of school districts in the United States are doing away with recess.[19] Studies show that this lack of free and unstructured play during recess may contribute to the rise in childhood obesity, anxiety and depression among children, as well as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Childhood obesity and type 2 diabetes
Childhood obesity and type 2 diabetes are also a major concern as United States youth do not get the physical outlet needed not only for their cognitive development but for their physical health.[20] Statistics show that children are getting 50% less physical exploration and activity than decades before.[21] Research has shown that spending 60 minutes a day doing physical activity can prevent childhood obesity.[22] The U.S. Health and Human Services department also has a guideline for 60 minutes a day of physical activity.[23] But, research has shown that only very few children actually meet this national guideline.[24] Failure to meet this guideline and exercise daily is leading to harmful health issues for children.[25] Recess can be an outlet for students to get some of this physical activity and aid in preventing childhood obesity and diabetes.[14]

Timing of recess
Another important aspect of recess to consider is what time of day it should be implemented. Traditionally schools have recess after lunch. But, in 2002, the Recess before Lunch (RBL) movement was founded. A health team in Montana created a study on four schools that made this schedule adjustment. After this study, many schools have started adapting the recess before lunch schedule.[26] Research suggests that having recess before lunch can improve the nutrition and behavior of elementary students.[27]

Effects on classroom behavior
According to the American Heart Association, the CDC reported that there is a link between physical activity and academic performance in 2010.[28] Some benefits to recess include students being more attentive, better academic performance and better behavior.[29] Many different studies show recess as being beneficial to students in the classroom. One of the goals of recess is to help students release excess energy and be refreshed focused upon return to the classroom.[30] According to a 2009 study, children who received daily recess were reported to behave better within the classroom.[31] After a long time in the classroom, students may become restless and disengaged. Studies show that after recess students become more attentive and engaged in classroom discussions.[32] This is because recess gave students a necessary break from the rigorous classroom and learning setting. A 2017 study of fifth graders suggested that 25 minutes of recess could increase students' time on task.[33] Also, recess can reduce the risk of students falling asleep during learning time by its physical aspect allows students' bodies to oxygenate and stay awake.[34]

Restriction of recess as disciplinary action
In many schools around the country recess is taken away from students as disciplinary action. In 2013, researchers from the University of Chicago Illinois found that 68 percent of school districts had no policy or law prohibiting educators from taking away physical activity from students.[35] Because of this, many educators and administrators take away recess as a punishment. A Gallup poll conducted in 2009 revealed that 77 percent of principals say that they have taken away recess from students.[36] Oftentimes students serve punishments such as completing late work or talking to the principal regarding behavioral issues during their recess times.[37] However, by taking away recess, students are unable to release any excess energy that they may have. Releasing this excess energy can lead to better behavior and academic performance.[37] Although taking away recess as disciplinary action seems to be the decision in many schools, researchers are coming up with alternatives for the elimination of recess.[38] Some of these alternatives include positive reinforcement which rewards children for positive behavior rather than taking away things for negative behavior. In this situation, every child is guaranteed recess.[39]

International recess

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, high school (11–16 or 18) students traditionally do not have "free periods" but do have "break" which normally occurs just after their second lesson of the day (normally referred to as second period). This generally lasts for around 20 minutes. During the break, snacks are sometimes sold in the canteen (U.S. cafeteria) and students normally use this time to socialize or finish off any homework or schoolwork that needs to be completed. Once the break is finished, students go to their next class. Lunchtime commences one or two lessons later and usually lasts around 45–60 minutes. This system is more or less the same in junior schools (7–11) in the UK and Ireland and in high schools (14–18) in the U.S., but infant schools (4 or 5–7) normally add another break time towards the end of the day.

In Australia and New Zealand, a mid-morning recess is taken for morning tea (colloquially known as little lunch).[40] While in Canada, the break is referred to as "lunch-break", "recess", or play-lunch. In all three countries, it is followed by mid-morning classes, after which a more lengthy meal break, lunch or lunchtime, is taken. Thus, the structure of the school-day consists of three lesson blocks, broken up by two intervals: recess (morning tea) and lunch respectively.

The average school day in Japan is eight hours but the time in the classroom is no different compared to the U.S.: time spent out of the classroom is what makes the day longer. A quarter of the day is spent in non-academic activities. A typical day contains the same amount of instructional time as children in the U.S. but a long enough lunch break to go home and eat with their family. This gives the students time to soak in their morning lesson and prepare for the afternoon session. Students who do not go home read for their pleasure or interact with other students. When the school day is over the majority of the students do not go home, but rather stay after school for clubs and other activities. The benefits of having a longer break and several non-academic clubs after school is that the students interact with one another and tend to have fewer physical symptoms related to stress, as well as better relationships with their classmates.

Some schools in Beijing, China allow children to spend an hour or two to socialize or to step out of the classroom per day. Some schools do not have a dedicated recess period, instead allowing a ten-minute break per class session. For lunch, students either pack or buy from the school's lunch area. After lunch time there is a quiet period. During this period, children may read at their desks or play by themselves. Meanwhile, a few students are chosen to help clean up from lunch, which may be perceived as a coveted assignment. Schools implementing a no-recess policy may not even have a playground, while schools allowing recess may have multiple playgrounds or basketball courts.

Finnish students rank near the top in terms of academic testing and knowledge, and their students receive over an hour of recess everyday, regardless of the weather. In Finland schools consider recess to be an essential part of the school day, and this element of their curriculum is attracting international attention.

In Spain, all primary, middle and high schools allow a recess time for its students.

In Wales, pupils are expected to do only one hour of PE per fourteen days.[41]

United States
In the United States, recess policies are largely dependent on the school district, and vary from state to state and from school to school.[42] Most states do not have a recess policy. However, it is recommended that schools provide 150 minutes per week for physical activity in elementary schools and 225 minutes per week in middle and high school.[43] The point where recess ends in a child's education is largely dependent on the school district, though by many standards it is removed when the child enters middle school. However, in college, students usually have free periods, which are similar in spirit, although usually one studies or talks with one's friends during such times rather than playing games, which are made difficult by the lack of a playground.

Common recess activities
Recess is a common part of the school day for children around the world, but it has not received much attention from scholars. The research that has been conducted occurred mostly in the United States and the UK.[44] Of the fifty states in the United States, only fifteen have policies that recommend or require daily recess or a physical activity break, and one (Oklahoma) has no policy, but it is recommended by the State Board of Education.[45]

Certain activities have emerged as playground favorites, including: jump rope, Chinese jump rope, four square, hop scotch, basketball, soccer, hula hoops, chase, wall ball, and playing on the playground equipment.[46] These activities have been classified into chase games, ball games, and jumping/verbal games.[47] Other categories to consider would be general play and equipment related play.

Chase games: tag, chase, hide and go seek
Ball games: four square, basketball, wall ball, soccer, kick ball
Jumping/verbal games: jump rope, Chinese jump rope, hop scotch, hula hoops, chanting/clapping/rhyming games, Duck Duck Goose
General play: make believe or fantasy play, solitary play
Equipment related play: swings, slides, climbing, monkey bars, tetherball
Games and play both occur on playgrounds, so it is important to differentiate between the two when discussing activities in which children engage at recess. One way to view their uniqueness is to look at the function of their rules. Games, such as basketball, have concrete rules that result in penalties when broken. Play rules, on the other hand, are flexible and can change at the discretion of the players.[47] There are times though when kids will bend the concrete rules of some games to make new versions of these games that may or may not be remembered in future times of play.

Recess activities run the gamut from simple to complex. Children's gender and age affects their recess recreation choices.[47] The youngest children in elementary schools (kindergarten through second grade) prefer the simplest activities such as chase, kickball, jump rope, and unstructured games. As the school year progresses, it has been observed that chase games diminish and ball games increase.[47] By the time children are in upper elementary school (grades three through five), they prefer sports and social sedentary behavior like talking.

References
 Tran, Irene; Clark, B. Ruth; Racette, Susan B. (November 21, 2013). "Physical Activity During Recess Outdoors and Indoors Among Urban Public School Students, St. Louis, Missouri, 2010–2011". Preventing Chronic Disease. 10: E196. doi:10.5888/pcd10.130135. ISSN 1545-1151. PMC 3839587. PMID 24262028.
 Honeyford, Michelle A.; Boyd, Karen (April 14, 2015). "Learning Through Play". Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy. 59 (1): 63–73. doi:10.1002/jaal.428. ISSN 1081-3004.
 Ramsetter, Catherine; Robert Murray; Andrew S. Garner (2010). "The Crucial Role Of Recess In Schools". Journal of School Health. 80 (11): 517–26. doi:10.1111/j.1746-1561.2010.00537.x. PMID 21039550. S2CID 9939562.
 Gray, Peter (November 19, 2008). "The Value of Play 1: The Definition of Play Provides Clues to its Purpose". Psychologytoday.com.
 Adams, Caralee. "Recess Makes Kids Smarter". Scholastic Instructor. Retrieved March 10, 2014.
 Trickey, Helyn (August 22, 2006). "No Child Left out of the Dodgeball Game?". Articles.cnn.com. Archived from the original on October 27, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2010.
 How much do we know about the importance of play in child development? Tsao, Ling-Ling. Childhood Education. Olney. Summer 2002. Vol. 78, Iss. 4; Pg 230
 "10 Things Every Parent Should Know About Play | NAEYC". www.naeyc.org. Retrieved November 20, 2018.
 Jarrett, O., Waite-Stupiansky, S. (September 2009). Play, Policy, and Practice Interest Forum.
 Ginsburg, Kenneth R. (January 1, 2007). "The Importance of Play in Promoting Healthy Child Development and Maintaining Strong Parent-Child Bonds". Pediatrics. 119 (1): 182–191. doi:10.1542/peds.2006-2697. ISSN 0031-4005. PMID 17200287.
 Walker, Olga L.; Degnan, Kathryn A.; Fox, Nathan A.; Henderson, Heather A. (2013). "Social Problem-Solving in Early Childhood: Developmental Change and the Influence of Shyness". Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology. 34 (4): 185–193. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2013.04.001. ISSN 0193-3973. PMC 3768023. PMID 24039325.
 "Developmental Play At School: Fun And Essential For Learning!". Child Development Institute. April 28, 2014. Retrieved November 19, 2018.
 Theobald, Maryanne (2013). "Ideas As "Possessitives": Claims And Counter Claims In A Playground Dispute" (PDF). Journal of Pragmatics. 45 (1): 1. doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2012.09.009.
 Ramstetter, Catherine L.; Murray, Robert; Garner, Andrew S. (October 7, 2010). "The Crucial Role of Recess in Schools". Journal of School Health. 80 (11): 517–526. doi:10.1111/j.1746-1561.2010.00537.x. ISSN 0022-4391. PMID 21039550. S2CID 9939562.
 Pellegrini, Anthony (Fall 2008). "The Recess Debate: A Disjuncture between Educational Policy and Scientific Research" (PDF). American Journal of Play: 181–190.
 Jarret, Olga (November 2013). "A Research-Based Case for Recess" (PDF). US Play Coalition: 1–5.
 Shohamy, Daphna; Adcock, R. Alison (2010). "Dopamine and adaptive memory". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 14 (10): 464–472. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.459.5641. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2010.08.002. ISSN 1364-6613. PMID 20829095. S2CID 7628266.
 "10 Things Every Parent Should Know About Play | NAEYC". www.naeyc.org. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 "IPA/USA : Promoting Recess". www.ipausa.org. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 Recess-It's Indispensable! Young Children. National Association for the Education of young children. September 2009 Vol. 64, No. 5; pg. 66.
 "The Loss of Children's Play: A Public Health Issue" (PDF). Alliance for Childhood. November 2010. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
 "Recess a crucial part of school day, says American Academy of Pediatrics". Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 (ASH), President’s Council on Sports, Fitness & Nutrition, Assistant Secretary for Health (July 20, 2012). "Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans". HHS.gov. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 "Few children get 60 minutes of vigorous physical activity daily". Tufts Now. April 5, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 Beck, Erin. "Lack of Exercise for Children". LIVESTRONG.COM. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 "Recess Before Lunch". NEA. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 "Benefits of Recess Before Lunch" (PDF). Retrieved October 12, 2018.
 "Status of Physical Education in the USA" (PDF). 2010. Retrieved October 11, 2018.
 Jarrett, Olga S.; Maxwell, Darlene M.; Dickerson, Carrie; Hoge, Pamela; Davies, Gwen; Yetley, Amy (1998). "Impact of Recess on Classroom Behavior: Group Effects and Individual Differences". The Journal of Educational Research. 92 (2): 121–126. doi:10.1080/00220679809597584. ISSN 0022-0671.
 University, Stanford (February 11, 2015). "School recess offers benefits to student well-being, Stanford educator reports". Stanford News. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 Baros, Romina; Silver, Ellen; Stein, Ruth (February 2009). "School Recess and Group Classroom Behavior" (PDF). Peadiactics. 123: 431–435.
 Singer, Dorothy; Golinkoff, Roberta Michnick; Hirsh-Pasek, Kathy (August 24, 2006). Play = Learning: How Play Motivates and Enhances Children's Cognitive and Social-Emotional Growth. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198041429.
 Smith, Jenny (May 2017). "THE EFFECT OF RECESS ON FIFTH GRADE STUDENTS' TIME ON-TASK IN AN ELEMENTARY CLASSROOM" (PDF). The University of Mississippi.
 Hinson, Dr. Curt. "What is recess? – Playfit Education". www.playfiteducation.com. Retrieved October 12, 2018.
 Chriqui, Jamie; Resnick, Elissa; Chaloupka, Frank (February 2013). "School District Wellness Policies: Evaluating Progress and Potential for Improving Children's Health Five Years after the Federal Mandate" (PDF). Bridging the Gap.
 The State of Play (PDF) (Report). Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. 2009. p. 9.
 "Educators debate taking away recess". Chalkbeat. March 18, 2013. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 "Positive Discipline: 10 Ways to Stop Taking Recess Away – The Inspired Treehouse". The Inspired Treehouse. September 23, 2015. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 Cordell, Sigrid Anderson (October 23, 2013). "Nixing Recess: The Silly, Alarmingly Popular Way to Punish Kids". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 14, 2018.
 Macquarie Dictionary Publishers (2023). Little lunch (Online ed.). Sydney.
 "PE Provision in Secondary Schools" (PDF). Sports Council Wales. Retrieved July 28, 2016.
 "The Crucial Role of Recess in Schools". ResearchGate. Retrieved November 19, 2018.
 "Physical Education Guidelines". Shape America Society of Health and Physical Educators. Retrieved November 11, 2018.
 Holmes, Robyn M. (Winter 2012). "The Outdoor Recess Activities of Children at an Urban School: Longitudinal and Intraperiod Patterns". American Journal of Play. 4 (3): 327–351.
 "Recess Facts". April 23, 2012.
 Sinclair, Christina D.; Stellino, Megan Babkes; Partridge, Julie A. (2008). "Recess Activities of the Week (RAW): Promoting Free Time Physical Activity to Combat Childhood Obesity". Strategies: A Journal for Physical and Sport Educators. 21 (5): 21–24. doi:10.1080/08924562.2008.10590788. S2CID 73028181.
 Pellegrini, Anthony D.; Blatchford, Peter; Kato, Kentaro; Baines, Ed (February 2004). "A Short-term Longitudinal Study of Children's Playground Games in Primary School: Implications for Adjustment to School and Social Adjustment to School and Social Adjustment in the USA and the UK". Social Development. 13 (1): 107–123. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2004.00259.x.
External links

Look up recess in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
 Media related to Breaks (time) at Wikimedia Commons
Categories: Educational time organizationPlay (activity)School terminology
This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 02:15 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Recess (break)

11 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Character archetypes

In role-playing games
Appearance

Magical implements
Education
Limits on magic
Use of magic in society
References
External links
Magician (fantasy)

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(Redirected from Wizard (fantasy))
For other uses, see Magician (disambiguation) and Magi (disambiguation).
"Wizard (fantasy)" redirects here. For other uses, see Wizard (disambiguation).

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Magician" fantasy – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

The Enchanted Garden of Messer Ansaldo by Marie Spartali Stillman (1889): A magician uses magic to survive.[1]
A magician, also known as an archmage, mage, magus, magic-user, spellcaster, enchanter/enchantress, sorcerer/sorceress, warlock, witch, or wizard, is someone who uses or practices magic derived from supernatural, occult, or arcane sources.[2]: 54  Magicians enjoy a rich history in mythology, legends, fiction, and folklore, and are common figures in works of fantasy, such as fantasy literature and role-playing games.

Character archetypes

The Enchanter Merlin, by Howard Pyle, from The Story of King Arthur and His Knights (1903)
People who work magic are called by several names in fantasy works, and terminology differs widely from one fantasy world to another. While derived from real-world vocabulary, the terms: magician, mage, magus, enchanter/enchantress, sorcerer/sorceress, warlock, witch, and wizard, each have different meanings depending upon context and the story in question.[3]: 619  Archmage is used in fantasy works to indicate a powerful magician or a leader of magicians.[3]: 1027 


The Love Potion by Evelyn De Morgan (1903)
Enchanters typically practice a type of imbued magic that produces no permanent effects on objects or people and are temporary, or of an indefinite duration, or which may require some item or act, to nullify or reverse. For example, this could include enchanting a weapon or tool to be more (or less) effective, enchanting a person or object to have a changed shape or appearance, creating illusions intended to deceive the observer, compelling a person to perform an action they might not normally do, or attempting to charm or seduce someone.[3]: 318  For instance, the Lady of the Green Kirtle in C. S. Lewis's The Silver Chair can transform herself into a large green serpent. She also enchants Rilian, compelling him to forget his father and Narnia. And when that enchantment is broken, she attempts further enchantments with a sweet-smelling smoke and a thrumming musical instrument to attempt to baffle him and his rescuers into forgetting them again.[4]

The term sorcerer has moved from meaning a fortune-teller, or "one who alters fate", to meaning a practitioner of magic who can alter reality. They are also sometimes shown as able to conjure supernatural beings or spirits, or to "animate" inanimate objects, such as in The Sorcerer's Apprentice. Due to this perception of their powers, this character may be depicted as feared, or even seen as evil. Villainous sorcerers were so crucial to pulp fantasy that the genre in which they appeared was dubbed "sword and sorcery", where typically the hero (or anti-hero) would be the sword-wielder, thus leaving the sorcery for his opponent.[3]: 885 

Witch (an—often female—practitioner of witchcraft) and wicked (an adjective meaning "bad, evil, false") are both derivative terms from the word, wicca (an Old English word with varied meanings, including soothsayer, astrologer, herbalist, poisoner, seductress, or devotee of supernatural beings or spirits). L. Frank Baum combined these terms in naming the Wicked Witch of the West, and other witches in the Land of Oz. Baum named Glinda the "Good Witch of the South" in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. In The Marvelous Land of Oz, he dubbed her "Glinda the Good," and from that point forward and in subsequent books, Baum referred to her as a sorceress rather than a witch to avoid the term that was more regarded as evil.[5] In modern fiction, a witch may be depicted more neutrally, such as the female witches (comparable to the male wizards) in the Harry Potter series of books by J. K. Rowling.

In medieval chivalric romance, the wizard often appears as a wise old man and acts as a mentor, with Merlin from the King Arthur stories being a prime example.[6]: 195  Wizards such as Gandalf in The Lord of the Rings and Albus Dumbledore from Harry Potter are also featured as mentors, and Merlin remains prominent as both an educative force and mentor in the modern works of Arthuriana.[3]: 637 [7]

Wizards can be cast similarly to the absent-minded professor: being foolish and prone to misconjuring. They can also be capable of great magic, both good and evil.[2]: 140–141  Even comical magicians are often capable of great feats, such as those of Miracle Max in The Princess Bride; although he is a washed-up wizard fired by the villain, he saves the dying hero.[8]

Other wizards, such as Saruman from The Lord of the Rings or Lord Voldemort from Harry Potter, can appear as hostile villains.[6]: 193 

Ursula K. Le Guin's A Wizard of Earthsea explored the question of how wizards learned their art, introducing to modern fantasy the role of the wizard as the protagonist.[9] This theme has been further developed in modern fantasy, often leading to wizards as heroes on their own quests.[10] Such heroes may have their own mentor, a wizard as well.[3]: 637 

In role-playing games
Magicians in role-playing games often use names borrowed from fiction, myth and legend. They are typically delineated and named so that the game's players and game masters can know which rules apply.[3]: 385  Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson introduced the term "magic-user" in the original Dungeons & Dragons as a generic term for a practitioner of magic (in order to avoid the connotations of terms such as wizard or warlock); this lasted until the second edition of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons, where it was replaced with mage (later to become wizard). The exact rules vary from game to game.[11] The wizard or mage, as a character class, is distinguished by the ability to cast certain kinds of magic but being vulnerable in direct combat; sub-classes are distinguished by strengths in some areas of magic and weakness in others.[12] Sorcerers are distinguished from wizards as having an innate gift with magic, as well as having mystical or magical ancestry.[13] Warlocks are distinguished from wizards as creating forbidden "pacts" with powerful creatures to harness their innate magical gifts, similarly to clerics and paladins, who are empowered through divine and deific sources to perform thaumaturgical feats, while druids and rangers draw power from nature and the elements. Bards, on the other hand, are similar to wizards in learning magical abilities as scholarly practices, but differ in their power being tied to artistic expression rather than arcane knowledge.

Appearance

White-haired and white-bearded wizard with robes and hat

Golden Hat of Schifferstadt, circa 1,400-1,300 BC, Historical Museum of the Palatinate in Speyer, Germany.
Due to their traditional image as a wise old man or wise old woman, magicians may be depicted as old, white-haired, and in some instances with their hair (and in the case of male wizards, beards), being long and majestic enough to occasionally host lurking woodland creatures. This depiction predates the modern fantasy genre, being derived from the traditional image of wizards such as Merlin.[7][14]

Several golden hats adorned with astronomical sequences have been found in Europe. It has been speculated by archaeologists and historians that they were worn by ancient wizards.[15] The similarities shared with a fantasy magician's hat shape may mean that it is ultimately derived from them.

In fantasy, a magician may be shown wearing a pointed hat, robes, and/or a cloak. In more modern stories, a magician may be dressed similarly to a stage magician, wearing a top hat and tails, with an optional cape.

Terry Pratchett described robes as a magician's way of establishing to those they meet that they are capable of practicing magic.[16]

In the Dragonlance campaign setting of the Dungeons & Dragons role-playing game, wizards show their moral alignment by the colour of their robes.[17]

Magical implements

The Crystal Ball by John William Waterhouse (1902): showing implements used for magical purposes; the crystal, a book, a skull, and a wand
A magician's crystal ball is a crystal or glass ball commonly associated with clairvoyance, fortune-telling, or scrying.

Wands and staves have long been used as requirements for the magician.[6]: 152  Possibly derived from wand-like implements used in fertility rituals, such as apotropaic wands, the earliest known instance of the modern magical wand was featured in the Odyssey, used by Circe to transform Odysseus's men into animals. Italian fairy tales put wands into the hands of powerful fairies by the Late Middle Ages.[18] Today, magical wands are widespread in literature and are used from Witch World to Harry Potter. In The Lord of the Rings, Gandalf refuses to surrender his own staff, breaking Saruman's, which strips the latter of his power. This dependency on a particular magical item is common, and necessary to limit the magician's power for the story's sake – without it, the magician's powers may be weakened or absent entirely.[19] In the Harry Potter universe, a wizard must expend much greater effort and concentration to use magic without a wand, and only a few can control magic without one; taking away a wizard's wand in battle essentially disarms them.[citation needed]

In the Enchanted Forest Chronicles, Patricia Wrede depicts wizards who use magic based on their staves, and magicians who practice several kinds of magic, including wizard magic;[clarification needed] in the Regency fantasies, she and Caroline Stevermer depict magicians as identical to wizards, though inferior in skill and training.

Education

The Alchemist by William Fettes Douglas (1853): studying for arcane knowledge
Magicians normally learn spells by reading ancient tomes called grimoires, which may have magical properties of their own.[3]: 126  Sorcerers in Conan the Barbarian often gained powers from such books, which are demarcated by their strange bindings. In worlds where magic is not an innate trait, the scarcity of these strange books may be a facet of the story; in Poul Anderson's A Midsummer Tempest, Prince Rupert seeks out the books of the magician Prospero to learn magic. The same occurs in the Dungeons and Dragons-based novel series Dragonlance Chronicles, wherein Raistlin Majere seeks out the books of the sorcerer Fistandantilus. In JK Rowling's Harry Potter series, wizards already have skills of magic but they need to practise magic in Wizarding Schools in order to be able to use it properly.

Some magicians, even after training, continue their education by learning more spells, inventing new ones (and new magical objects), or rediscovering ancient spells, beings, or objects. For example, Dr. Strange from the Marvel Universe continues to learn about magic even after being named Sorcerer Supreme. He often encounters creatures that have not been seen for centuries or more. In the same universe, Dr. Doom continues to pursue magical knowledge after mastering it by combining magic with science. Fred and George Weasley from Harry Potter invent new magical items and sell them as legitimate defense items, new spells and potions can be made in the Harry Potter Universe; Severus Snape invented a variety of jinxes and hexes as well as substantial improvements in the process of making potions; Albus Dumbledore, along with Nicolas Flamel, is credited with discovering the twelve uses of dragon's blood.

Limits on magic
To introduce conflict, writers of fantasy fiction often place limits on the magical abilities of magicians to prevent them from solving problems too easily.[3]: 616 

A common motif in fiction is that the ability to use magic is innate and often rare, or gained through a large amount of study and practice.[3]: 616  In J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth, magic is mostly limited to non-humans, such as the Istari (more commonly known as wizards), or elves crafting magical items. In many writers' works, it is reserved for a select group of humans,[citation needed] such as in Katherine Kurtz's Deryni novels, JK Rowling's Harry Potter novels or Randall Garrett's Lord Darcy universe.

A common limit invented by Jack Vance in his The Dying Earth series, and later popularized in role-playing games is that a wizard can only cast a specific number of spells in a day.[3]: 385  In Larry Niven's The Magic Goes Away, once an area's mana is exhausted, no one can use magic.[3]: 942 

The extent of a magician's knowledge is limited to which spells a wizard knows and can cast.[19] Magic may also be limited by its danger; if a powerful spell can cause grave harm if miscast, magicians are likely to be wary of using it.[2]: 142  Other forms of magic are limited by consequences that, while not inherently dangerous, are at least undesirable. In A Wizard of Earthsea, every act of magic distorts the equilibrium of the world, which in turn has far-reaching consequences that can affect the entire world and everything in it. As a result, competent wizards do not use their magic frivolously.[19]

In Terry Pratchett's Discworld series, the Law of Conservation of Reality is a principle imposed by forces wanting wizards to not destroy the world, and works to limit how much power it is humanly possible to wield.[citation needed] Whatever your means, the effort put into reaching the ends stays the same. For example, when the wizards of Unseen University are chasing the hapless wizard Rincewind in the forest of Skund, the wizards send out search teams to go and find him on foot. The Archchancellor beats them to it by using a powerful spell from his own office, and while he gets there first by clever use of his spell, he has used no less effort than the others.[citation needed]

Magic may require rare and precious materials, such as rare herbs or flowers (often selected by prescribed rituals), minerals or metals such as mercury, parts of creatures such as the eye of a newt, or even fantastic ingredients like the cool of a soft breeze on a summer's day. Even if the magician lacks scruples, obtaining the materials in question may be difficult.[20] This can vary by fantasy work. Many magicians require no materials at all;[3]: 617  or those that do may require only simple and easily obtained materials. Role-playing games are more likely to require such materials for at least some spells for game balance reasons.[21][self-published source?]

Use of magic in society
Nevertheless, many magicians live in pseudo-medieval settings in which their magic is not put to practical use in society; they may serve as mentors, act as quest companions, or even go on a quest themselves,[3]: 1027  but their magic does not build roads or buildings, provide immunizations, construct indoor plumbing, or do any of the other functions served by machinery; their worlds remain at a medieval level of technology.[22]

Sometimes this is justified by having the negative effects of magic outweigh the positive possibilities.[2]: 8  In Barbara Hambley's Windrose Chronicles, wizards are precisely pledged not to interfere because of the terrible damage they can do. In Discworld, the importance of wizards is that they actively do not do magic, because when wizards have access to sufficient "thaumaturgic energy", they develop many psychotic attributes and may eventually destroy the world. This may be a direct effect or the result of a miscast spell wreaking terrible havoc.[2]: 142 

In other works, developing magic is difficult.[citation needed] In Rick Cook's Wizardry series, the extreme danger presented by magic and the difficulty of analyzing the magic have stymied magic and left humanity at the mercy of the dangerous elves until a wizard summons a computer programmer from a parallel world — ours — to apply the skills he learned in our world to magic.

At other times, magic and technology do develop in tandem; this is most common in the alternate history genre.[citation needed] Patricia Wrede's Regency fantasies include a Royal Society of Wizards and a technological level equivalent to the actual Regency; Randall Garrett's Lord Darcy series, Robert A. Heinlein's Magic, Incorporated, and Poul Anderson's Operation Chaos all depict modern societies with magic equivalent to twentieth-century technology. In Harry Potter, wizards have magical equivalents to non-magical inventions; sometimes they duplicate them, as with the Hogwarts Express train.

The powers ascribed to magicians often affect their roles in society.[original research?] In practical terms, their powers may give them authority; magicians may advise kings, such as Gandalf in The Lord of the Rings and Belgarath and Polgara the Sorceress in David Eddings's The Belgariad. They may be rulers themselves, as in E.R. Eddison's The Worm Ouroboros, where both the heroes and the villains, although kings and lords, supplement their physical power with magical knowledge, or as in Jonathan Stroud's Bartimaeus Trilogy, where magicians are the governing class.[3]: 1027  On the other hand, magicians often live like hermits, isolated in their towers and often in the wilderness, bringing no change to society. In some works, such as many of Barbara Hambly's, they are despised and outcast specifically because of their knowledge and powers.[3]: 745 

In the magic-noir world of the Dresden Files, wizards generally keep a low profile, though there is no explicit prohibition against interacting openly with non-magical humanity. The protagonist of the series, Harry Dresden, openly advertises in the Yellow Pages under the heading "Wizard" and maintains a business office, though other wizards tend to resent him for practicing his craft openly. Dresden primarily uses his magic to make a living finding lost items and people, performing exorcisms, and providing protection against the supernatural.[23]

In the series Sorcerous Stabber Orphen, human forms of life should have only been capable of acquiring divine magic powers through individual spiritual development, whereas the race of human magicians with inborn magical ability ended in conflict with pureblood human society, because this race appeared as a result of an experiment of mixing humans with non-human sentient Heavenly Beings that acquired magic powers not through spiritual development, but through deep studying of laws of nature and by falsely causing the world's laws to react to actions of the Heavenly Beings as to actions of Divinities.[24] In the Harry Potter series, the Wizarding World hides themselves from the rest of the non-magic world, because, as described by Hagrid simply, "Why? Blimey, Harry, everyone’d be wantin’ magic solutions to their problems. Nah, we’re best left alone.”

References
 "The Enchanted Garden of Messer Ansaldo by Marie Spartali Stillman". ArtMagick. Archived from the original on 2016-03-08. Retrieved 2013-10-16.
 Martin, Philip (2002). The Writer's Guide to Fantasy Literature: From Dragon's Lair to Hero's Quest: How to Write Fantasy Stories of Lasting Value (1st ed.). Waukesha, Wisconsin: Writer Books. ISBN 0871161958.
 Clute, John; Westfahl (1999). The Encyclopedia of Fantasy (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 0312198698.
 Bassham, Gregory (2005). The Chronicles of Narnia and Philosophy: the Lion, the Witch, and the Worldview (1st ed.). Chicago: Open Court. p. 171. ISBN 0812695887.
 Riley, Michael O. (1997). Oz and Beyond: The Fantasy World of L. Frank Baum. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. p. 104. ISBN 070060832X.
 Frye, Northrop (1971). Anatomy of Criticism; Four Essays (2nd ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691012989.
 Driver, Martha W. (2004). The Medieval Hero on Screen: Representations from Beowulf to Buffy. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. pp. 167–191. ISBN 0786419261.
 Card, Orson Scott (1999). Characters and Viewpoint (1st ed.). Cincinnati, Ohio: Writer's Digest Books. p. 100. ISBN 0898799279.
 Wood, Susan (1982). The Language of the Night: Essays On Fantasy and Science Fiction (Reprinted ed.). New York: Berkley Books. p. 41. ISBN 0425052052.
 Fike, Justin. "The Role of Wizards in Fantasy Literature". The Victorian Web. Archived from the original on 2013-10-16. Retrieved 2013-10-16.
 "Dungeons & Dragons", Wikipedia, 2024-08-03, retrieved 2024-08-07
 Cook, David "Zed" (1989). Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Player's Handbook (2nd ed.). Lake Geneva, Wisconsin: TSR. pp. 30–31. ISBN 0880387165.
 Williams, Skip (2003). Dungeons & Dragons Player's Handbook (Special ed.). Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast. p. 51. ISBN 0786928867.
 Colbert, David (2001). The Magical Worlds of Harry Potter: A Treasury of Myths, Legends, and Fascinating Facts (1st ed.). Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina: Lumina Press. p. 70. ISBN 0970844204.
 Paterson, Tony (17 March 2002). "Mysterious gold cones 'hats of ancient wizards'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2022-01-12. Retrieved 14 October 2021.
 Marcio, Kneidinger (1948-04-28). "Analysis". Terry Pratchett's Discworld. L-Space Web. Archived from the original on 2013-06-07. Retrieved 2013-10-16.
 Hickman, Tracy; Weis, Margaret (1987). DragonLance Adventures. Lake Geneva, Wisconsin: TSR. pp. 34-35. ISBN 0880384522.
 Benvenuto, Raffaella (2006). "Italian Fairies: Fate, Folletti, and Other Creatures of Legend". Journal of Mythic Arts. Endicott Studio. Archived from the original on 2013-10-16. Retrieved 2013-10-16.
 Kern, Michael. "The Limits of Magic". The Victorian Web. Archived from the original on 2013-10-16. Retrieved 2013-10-13.
 Card, Orson Scott (1990). How to Write Science Fiction and Fantasy (1st ed.). Cincinnati, Ohio: Writer's Digest Books. pp. 47–49. ISBN 0898794161.
 Woolsey, Doug; Olson, Donald (2004). Battleaxe Rpg: Reforged Edition. Lulu.com. pp. 167–173. ISBN 9781442105935. Retrieved 19 February 2016.
 Brin, David (1994). Otherness. New York: Bantam Books. p. 261. ISBN 0553295284.
 Krug, Kurt Anthony (2018-07-27). "There's Something About Harry: A Look Into Jim Butcher's Character Harry Dresden". The Strand Magazine. Retrieved 2019-01-18.
 Mizuno, Ryou (2019). Sorcerous Stabber Orphen Anthology. Commentary (in Japanese). TO Books. p. 235. ISBN 9784864728799.
External links

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fictional magicians.
Patricia Wrede, "Magic and Magicians", Fantasy Worldbuilding Questions
vte
Fantasy fiction
vte
Speculative fiction
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
GermanyUnited StatesCzech Republic234Israel
Categories: Fictional characters who use magicFairy tale stock charactersFantasy tropesJungian archetypesSupernatural legends
This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 15:08 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Magician (fantasy)

11 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
History

Types

Customs and practices

Contemporary management

Superstitions
Gallery
See also
References
Bibliography
Further reading
External links
Cemetery

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(Redirected from Graveyard)
For other uses, see Cemetery (disambiguation).
"Resting place" redirects here. For the 1986 TV series, see Resting Place. For the 1951 film, see No Resting Place. Not to be confused with Rest area.
"Graveyard" and "Burial ground" redirect here. For other uses, see Graveyard (disambiguation) and Burial Ground (disambiguation).

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these messages)
This article possibly contains original research. (February 2021)
This article needs additional citations for verification. (January 2022)
The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. (January 2024)

Kerepesi Cemetery, Budapest, Hungary

Cemetery in China

Cemetery in Kavala, Greece
A cemetery, burial ground, gravesite, graveyard, or a green space called a memorial park or memorial garden, is a place where the remains of many dead people are buried or otherwise entombed. The word cemetery (from Greek κοιμητήριον 'sleeping place')[1][2] implies that the land is specifically designated as a burial ground and originally applied to the Roman catacombs.[3] The term graveyard is often used interchangeably with cemetery, but a graveyard primarily refers to a burial ground within a churchyard.[4][5]

The intact or cremated remains of people may be interred in a grave, commonly referred to as burial, or in a tomb, an "above-ground grave" (resembling a sarcophagus), a mausoleum, a columbarium, a niche, or another edifice. In Western cultures, funeral ceremonies are often observed in cemeteries. These ceremonies or rites of passage differ according to cultural practices and religious beliefs. Modern cemeteries often include crematoria, and some grounds previously used for both continue as crematoria as a principal use long after the interment areas have been filled.

History
Palaeolithic
The Taforalt cave in Morocco is possibly the oldest known cemetery in the world. It was the resting place of at least 34 Iberomaurusian individuals, the bulk of whom have been dated to 15,100 to 14,000 years ago.[1]

Neolithic
Main article: Grave field
Further information: tomb, necropolis, and Funerary art
Neolithic cemeteries are sometimes referred to by the term "grave field". They are one of the chief sources of information on ancient and prehistoric cultures, and numerous archaeological cultures are defined by their burial customs, such as the

Urnfield culture of the European Bronze Age.[2]

Middle Ages
During the Early Middle Ages, the reopening of graves and manipulation of the corpses or artifacts contained within them was a widespread phenomenon and a common part of the life course of early medieval cemeteries across Western and Central Europe.[6] The reopening of furnished or recent burials occurred over the broad zone of European row-grave-style furnished inhumation burial, especially from the 5th to the 8th centuries CE, which comprised the regions of today's Romania, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Switzerland, Austria, Germany, the Low Countries, France, and south-eastern England.[6]

Early Christianity
Further information: Christian burial

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Les Innocents cemetery in 1550.
From about the 7th century CE, in Europe a burial was under the control of the Church and could only take place on consecrated church ground. Practices varied, but in continental Europe, bodies were usually buried in a mass grave until they had decomposed. The bones were then exhumed and stored in ossuaries, either along the arcaded bounding walls of the cemetery or within the church under floor slabs and behind walls.

In most cultures those who were vastly rich, had important professions, were part of the nobility or were of any other high social status were usually buried in individual crypts inside or beneath the relevant place of worship with an indication of their name, date of death and other biographical data. In Europe, this was often accompanied by a depiction of their coat of arms.

Most others were buried in graveyards again divided by social status. Mourners who could afford the work of a stonemason had a headstone engraved with a name, dates of birth and death and sometimes other biographical data, and set up over the place of burial. Usually, the more writing and symbols carved on the headstone, the more expensive it was. As with most other human property such as houses and means of transport, richer families used to compete for the artistic value of their family headstone in comparison to others around it, sometimes adding a statue (such as a weeping angel) on the top of the grave.

Those who could not pay for a headstone at all usually had some religious symbol made from wood on the place of burial such as a Christian cross; however, this would quickly deteriorate under the rain or snow. Some families hired a blacksmith and had large crosses made from various metals put on the places of burial.

Modernity

Cemetery overlooking the Danube, near Cernavodă, Romania
Starting in the early 19th century, the burial of the dead in graveyards began to be discontinued, due to rapid population growth in the early stages of the Industrial Revolution, continued outbreaks of infectious disease near graveyards and the increasingly limited space in graveyards for new interments. In many European states, burial in graveyards was eventually outlawed altogether through legislation.

Instead of graveyards, completely new places of burial were established away from heavily populated areas and outside of old towns and city centers. Many new cemeteries became municipally owned or were run by their own corporations, and thus independent from churches and their churchyards.

In some cases, skeletons were exhumed from graveyards and moved into ossuaries or catacombs. A large action of this type occurred in 18th century Paris when human remains were transferred from graveyards all over the city to the Catacombs of Paris. The bones of an estimated six million people are to be found there.[7]

An early example of a landscape-style cemetery is Père Lachaise in Paris. This embodied the idea of state- rather than church-controlled burial, a concept that spread through the continent of Europe with the Napoleonic invasions. This could include the opening of cemeteries by private or joint stock companies. The shift to municipal cemeteries or those established by private companies was usually accompanied by the establishing of landscaped burial grounds outside the city (e.g. extramural).


John Claudius Loudon, one of the first professional cemetery designers.
In Britain the movement was driven by dissenters and public health concerns. The Rosary Cemetery in Norwich was opened in 1819 as a burial ground for all religious backgrounds. Similar private non-denominational cemeteries were established near industrialising towns with growing populations, such as Manchester (1821) and Liverpool (1825). Each cemetery required a separate Act of Parliament for authorisation, although the capital was raised through the formation of joint-stock companies.

In the first 50 years of the 19th century the population of London more than doubled from 1 million to 2.3 million. The small parish churchyards were rapidly becoming dangerously overcrowded, and decaying matter infiltrating the water supply was causing epidemics. The issue became particularly acute after the cholera epidemic of 1831, which killed 52,000 people in Britain alone, putting unprecedented pressure on the country's burial capacity. Concerns were also raised about the potential public health hazard arising from the inhalation of gases generated from human putrefaction under the then prevailing miasma theory of disease.

Legislative action was slow in coming, but in 1832 Parliament finally acknowledged the need for the establishment of large municipal cemeteries and encouraged their construction outside London. The same bill also closed all inner London churchyards to new deposits. The Magnificent Seven, seven large cemeteries around London, were established in the following decade, starting with Kensal Green in 1832.[8]

Urban planner and author John Claudius Loudon was one of the first professional cemetery designers, and his book On the Laying Out, Planting and Managing of Cemeteries (1843) was very influential on designers and architects of the period. Loudon himself designed three cemeteries – Bath Abbey Cemetery, Histon Road Cemetery, Cambridge, and Southampton Old Cemetery.[9]

The Metropolitan Burial Act 1852 legislated for the establishment of the first national system of government-funded municipal cemeteries across the country, opening the way for a massive expansion of burial facilities throughout the late 19th century.[10]

In the United States, rural cemeteries became recreational areas in a time before public parks, hosting events from casual picnics to hunts and carriage races.[11][12]

Types

A cemetery in Nurmijärvi, Finland

A Soviet military cemetery on the island of Saaremaa, Estonia.

The Laird's traditional Scottish graveyard at Kindrogan House, Strathardle.

The town cemetery on the plains of Calhan, Colorado.

The 1,400 square feet (130 m2) plot pictured here has the graves of nineteen members of the Hillendahl family, including one who was interred in 1854, in the Spring Branch area of Houston, Texas, United States. A descendant of the family sold all of the land around the grave site, but refused to move the actual graves.[13]
There are a number of different styles of cemetery in use. Many cemeteries have areas based on different styles, reflecting the diversity of cultural practices around death and how it changes over time.

Urban

Avenue with linden in the cemetery by Ringkøbing, Jutland, Denmark.

Graves at the Hietaniemi Cemetery in Helsinki, Uusimaa, Finland.
The urban cemetery is a burial ground located in the interior of a village, town, or city. Early urban cemeteries were churchyards, which filled quickly and exhibited a haphazard placement of burial markers as sextons tried to squeeze new burials into the remaining space. As new burying grounds were established in urban areas to compensate, burial plots were often laid out in a grid to replace the chaotic appearance of the churchyard.[14] Urban cemeteries developed over time into a more landscaped form as part of civic development of beliefs and institutions that sought to portray the city as civilized and harmonious.[15]

Urban cemeteries were more sanitary (a place to safely dispose of decomposing corpses) than they were aesthetically pleasing. Corpses were usually buried wrapped in cloth, since coffins, burial vaults, and above-ground crypts inhibited the process of decomposition.[16] Nonetheless, urban cemeteries which were heavily used were often very unhealthy. Receiving vaults and crypts often needed to be aired before entering, as decomposing corpses used up so much oxygen that even candles could not remain lit.[17] The sheer stench from decomposing corpses, even when buried deeply, was overpowering in areas adjacent to the urban cemetery.[18][19] Decomposition of the human body releases significant pathogenic bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses which can cause disease and illness, and many urban cemeteries were located without consideration for local groundwater. Modern burials in urban cemeteries also release toxic chemicals associated with embalming, such as arsenic, formaldehyde, and mercury. Coffins and burial equipment can also release significant amounts of toxic chemicals such as arsenic (used to preserve coffin wood) and formaldehyde (used in varnishes and as a sealant) and toxic metals such as copper, lead, and zinc (from coffin handles and flanges).[20]

Urban cemeteries relied heavily on the fact that the soft parts of the body would decompose in about 25 years (although, in moist soil, decomposition can take up to 70 years).[21] If room for new burials was needed, older bones could be dug up and interred elsewhere (such as in an ossuary) to make space for new interments.[16] It was not uncommon in some places, such as England, for fresher corpses to be chopped up to aid decomposition, and for bones to be burned to create fertilizer.[22] The re-use of graves allowed for a steady stream of income, which enabled the cemetery to remain well-maintained and in good repair.[23] Not all urban cemeteries engaged in re-use of graves, and cultural taboos often prevented it. Many urban cemeteries have fallen into disrepair and become overgrown, as they lacked endowments to fund perpetual care. Many urban cemeteries today are thus home to wildlife, birds, and plants which cannot be found anywhere else in the urban area, and many urban cemeteries in the late 20th century touted their role as an environmental refuge.[24][25]

Many urban cemeteries are characterized by multiple burials in the same grave. Multiple burials is a consequence of the limited size of the urban cemetery, which cannot easily expand due to adjacent building development. It was not uncommon for an urban cemetery to begin adding soil to the top of the cemetery to create new burial space.

Monumental

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Monument of c. 1910 in the Monumental Cemetery of Staglieno in Genoa, Italy, one of the most spectacular of a number of Italian cemeteries featuring large-scale sculpture.

An artwork in a tomb by Victor Brecheret in Cemitério da Consolação, an example of monumental cemetery in São Paulo, Brazil.
A monumental cemetery is the traditional style of cemetery where headstones or other monuments made of marble, granite or similar materials rise vertically above the ground (typically around 50 cm but some can be over 2 metres high). Often the entire grave is covered by a slab, commonly concrete, but it can be more expensive materials such as marble or granite, and/or has its boundaries delimited by a fence which may be made of concrete, cast iron or timber. Where a number of family members are buried together (either vertically or horizontally), the slab or boundaries may encompass a number of graves.

Monumental cemeteries are often regarded as unsightly due to the random collection of monuments and headstones they contain. Also, as maintenance of the headstones is the responsibility of family members (in the absence of a proscribed Perpetual Care and Maintenance Fund), over time many headstones are forgotten about and decay and become damaged. For cemetery authorities, monumental cemeteries are difficult to maintain. While cemeteries often have grassed areas between graves, the layout of graves makes it difficult to use modern equipment such as ride-on lawn mowers in the cemetery. Often the maintenance of grass must be done by more labour-intensive (and therefore expensive) methods. In order to reduce the labour cost, devices such as string trimmers are increasingly used in cemetery maintenance,[citation needed] but such devices can damage the monuments and headstones. Cemetery authorities dislike the criticism they receive for the deteriorating condition of the headstones, arguing that they have no responsibility for the upkeep of headstones, and typically disregard their own maintenance practices as being one of the causes of that deterioration. [citation needed]

Rural or garden

A Muslim cemetery in Kashgar, Xinjiang, China.

Common Burying Ground and Island Cemetery in Newport, Rhode Island

A Muslim cemetery at sunset in Marrakech, Morocco

A roadside cemetery in Hualien, Taiwan

A cemetery in Kyoto, Japan

Two Colonial era graves in Pemaquid, Maine

Noratus cemetery, a medieval Armenian cemetery with a large number of early khachkars. The cemetery has the largest cluster of khachkars in the country.
Main article: Rural cemetery
The rural cemetery or garden cemetery[26] is a style of burial ground that uses landscaping in a park-like setting. It was conceived in 1711 by the British architect Sir Christopher Wren, who advocated the creation of landscaped burial grounds which featured well-planned walkways which gave extensive access to graves and planned plantings of trees, bushes, and flowers.[27] Wren's idea was not immediately accepted. But by the early 1800s, existing churchyards were growing overcrowded and unhealthy, with graves stacked upon each other or emptied and reused for new burials.[28] As a reaction to this, the first "garden" cemetery – Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris – opened in 1804.[29] Because these cemeteries were usually on the outskirts of town (where land was plentiful and cheap), they were called "rural cemeteries", a term still used to describe them today.[28] The concept quickly spread across Europe.[30]

Duration: 1 minute and 6 seconds.1:06
Merry Cemetery, Romania
Garden/rural cemeteries were not necessarily outside city limits. When land within a city could be found, the cemetery was enclosed with a wall to give it a garden-like quality. These cemeteries were often not sectarian, nor co-located with a house of worship. Inspired by the English landscape garden movement,[31] they often looked like attractive parks. The first garden/rural cemetery in the United States was Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston, Massachusetts, founded by the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1831.[32] Following the establishment of Mount Auburn, dozens of other "rural" cemeteries were established in the United States – perhaps in part because of Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story's dedication address – and there were dozens of dedication addresses,[33] including the famous Gettysburg Address of President Abraham Lincoln.

The cost of building a garden/rural cemetery often meant that only the wealthy could afford burial there.[34] Subsequently, garden/rural cemeteries often feature above-ground monuments and memorials, mausoleums, and columbaria. The excessive filling of rural/garden cemeteries with elaborate above-ground memorials, many of dubious artistic quality or taste, created a backlash which led to the development of the lawn cemetery.[35]


Lawn cemetery
In a review of British burial and death practises, Julie Rugg wrote that there were "four closely interlinked factors that explain the 'invention' and widespread adoption of the lawn cemetery: the deterioration of the Victorian cemetery; a self-conscious rejection of Victorian aesthetics in favour of modern alternatives; resource difficulties that, particularly after World War II, increasingly constrained what might be achieved in terms of cemetery maintenance; and growing professionalism in the field of cemetery management."[36]

Typically, lawn cemeteries comprise a number of graves in a lawn setting with trees and gardens on the perimeter. Adolph Strauch introduced this style in 1855 in Cincinnati.[37] While aesthetic appeal to family members has been the primary driver for the development of lawn cemeteries, cemetery authorities initially welcomed this new style of cemetery enthusiastically, expecting easier maintenance. Selecting (or grading) the land intended for a lawn cemetery so that it is completely flat allows the use of large efficient mowers (such as ride-on mowers or lawn tractors) - the plaques (being horizontally set in the ground) lie below the level of the blades and are not damaged by the blades. In practice, while families are often initially attracted to the uncluttered appearance of a lawn cemetery, the common practice of placing flowers (sometimes in vases) and increasingly other items (e.g. small toys on children's graves) re-introduces some clutter to the cemetery and makes it difficult to use the larger mowers. While cemetery authorities increasingly impose restrictions on the nature and type of objects that can be placed on lawn graves and actively remove prohibited items, grieving families are often unwilling to comply with these restrictions and become very upset if the items are removed. Another problem with lawn cemeteries involves grass over-growth over time: the grass can grow over and cover the plaque, to the distress of families who can no longer easily locate the grave. Grasses that propagate by an above-ground stolon (runner) can cover a plaque very quickly. Grasses that propagate by a below-ground rhizome tend not to cover the plaque as easily.


Calvary Cemetery, Queens, New York

Overgrown cemetery overlooking the Danube, Romania
Lawn beam

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
The lawn beam cemetery, a recent development, seeks to solve the problems of the lawn cemetery while retaining many of its benefits. Low (10–15 cm) raised concrete slabs (beams) are placed across the cemetery. Commemorative plaques (usually standardised in terms of size and materials similar to lawn cemeteries) stand on these beams adjacent to each grave. As in a lawn cemetery, grass grows over the graves themselves. The areas between the beams are wide enough to permit easy mowing with a larger mower. As the mower blades are set lower than the top of the beam and the mowers do not go over the beam, the blades cannot damage the plaques. Up on the beam, the plaques cannot be easily overgrown by grass, and spaces between the plaques permit families to place flowers and other objects out of reach of the mowing.

Natural
See also: Environmental impact of conventional burial and Natural burial
A natural cemetery, eco-cemetery, green cemetery or conservation cemetery, is a new style of cemetery as an area set aside for natural burials (with or without coffins). Natural burials are motivated by a desire to be environmentally conscious with the body rapidly decomposing and becoming part of the natural environment without incurring the environmental cost of traditional burials. Certifications may be granted for various levels of green burial. Green burial certifications are issued in a tiered system reflecting level of natural burial practice. Green burial certification standards designate a cemetery as Hybrid, Natural, or Conservation Burial Grounds.

Many scientists have argued that natural burials would be a highly efficient use of land if designed specifically to save endangered habitats, ecosystems and species.[38]

The opposite has also been proposed. Instead of letting natural burials permanently protect wild landscapes, others have argued that the rapid decomposition of a natural burial, in principle, allows for the quick re-use of grave sites in comparison with conventional burials. However, it is unclear if reusing cemetery land will be culturally acceptable to most people.

In keeping with the intention of "returning to nature" and the early re-use potential, natural cemeteries do not normally have conventional grave markings such as headstones. Instead, exact GPS recordings and or the placing of a tree, bush or rock often marks the location of the dead, so grieving family and friends can visit the precise location of a grave.

Columbarium wall

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

A columbarium wall at Lawnton, Queensland, showing empty niches, plaques and flower holders
Columbarium walls are a common feature of many cemeteries, reflecting the increasing use of cremation rather than burial. While cremated remains can be kept at home by families in urns or scattered in some significant or attractive place, neither of these approaches allows for a long-lasting commemorative plaque to honour the dead nor provide a place for the wider circle of friends and family to come to mourn or visit. Therefore, many cemeteries now provide walls (typically of brick or rendered brick construction) with a rectangular array of niches, with each niche being big enough to accommodate a person's cremated remains. Columbarium walls are a very space-efficient use of land in a cemetery compared with burials and a niche in a columbarium wall is a much cheaper alternative to a burial plot. A small plaque (about 15 cm x 10 cm) can be affixed across the front of each niche and is generally included as part of the price of a niche. As the writing on the plaques has to be fairly small to fit on the small size of the plaque, the design of columbarium walls is constrained by the ability of visitors to read the plaques. Thus, the niches are typically placed between 1 metre to 2 metres above the ground so the plaques can be easily read by an adult. Some columbarium walls have niches going close to ground level, but these niches are usually unpopular with families as it is difficult to read the plaque without bending down very low (something older people in particular find difficult or uncomfortable to do).

As with graves, the niches may be assigned by the cemetery authorities or families may choose from the unoccupied niches available. It is usually possible to purchase (or pay a deposit) to reserve the use of adjacent niches for other family members. The use of adjacent niches (vertically or horizontally) usually permits a larger plaque spanning all the niches involved, which provides more space for the writing. As with graves, there may be separate columbarium walls for different religions or for war veterans. As with lawn cemeteries, the original expectation was that people would prefer the uncluttered simplicity of a wall of plaques, but the practice of leaving flowers is very entrenched. Mourners leave flowers (and other objects) on top of columbarium walls or at the base, as close as they can to the plaque of their family member. In some cases, it is possible to squeeze a piece of wire or string under the plaque allowing a flower or small posy to be placed on the plaque itself or clips are glued onto the plaque for that purpose. Newer designs of columbarium walls take this desire to leave flowers into account by incorporating a metal clip or loop beside each plaque, typically designed to hold a single flower stem or a small posy. As the flowers decay, they simply fall to the ground and do not create a significant maintenance problem.

Family

Family cemeteries in India
While uncommon today, family (or private) cemeteries were a matter of practicality during the settlement of America. If a municipal or religious cemetery had not been established, settlers would seek out a small plot of land, often in wooded areas bordering their fields, to begin a family plot. Sometimes, several families would arrange to bury their dead together. While some of these sites later grew into true cemeteries, many were forgotten after a family moved away or died out.

Today, it is not unheard of to discover groupings of tombstones, ranging from a few to a dozen or more, on undeveloped land. As late 20th-century suburban sprawl pressured the pace of development in formerly rural areas, it became increasingly common for larger exurban properties to be encumbered by "religious easements", which are legal requirements for the property owner to permit periodic maintenance of small burial plots located on the property but technically not owned with it. Often, cemeteries are relocated to accommodate building. However, if the cemetery is not relocated, descendants of people buried there may visit the cemetery.[39]

There is also the practice of families with large estates choosing to create private cemeteries in the form of burial sites, monuments, crypts, or mausoleums on their property; the mausoleum at Fallingwater is an example of this practice. Burial of a body at a site may protect the location from redevelopment, with such estates often being placed in the care of a trust or foundation. In the United States, state regulations have made it increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to start private cemeteries; many require a plan to care for the site in perpetuity. Private cemeteries are nearly always forbidden on incorporated residential zones. Many people will bury a beloved pet on the family property.

Arabian tribal
All of the Saudis in Al Baha are Muslims, and this is reflected in their cemetery and funeral customs. "The southern tribal hinterland of Baha – home to especially the Al-Ghamdi and Al-Zahrani tribes – has been renowned for centuries for their tribal cemeteries that are now slowly vanishing", according to the Asharq Al-Awsat newspaper: "One old villager explained how tribal cemeteries came about. 'People used to die in large numbers and very rapidly one after the other because of diseases. So the villagers would dig graves close by burying members of the same family in one area. That was how the family and tribal burial grounds came about... If the family ran out of space, they would open old graves where family members had been buried before and add more people to them.

This process is known as khashf. During famines and outbreaks of epidemics huge numbers of people would die and many tribes faced difficulties in digging new graves because of the difficult weather. In the past, some Arab winters lasted for more than six months and would be accompanied with much rain and fog, impeding movement. But due to tribal rivalries many families would guard their cemeteries and put restrictions on who was buried in them. Across Baha, burial grounds have been constructed in different ways. Some cemeteries consist of underground vaults or concrete burial chambers with the capacity of holding many bodies simultaneously. Such vaults include windows for people to peer through and are usually decorated ornately with text, drawings, and patterns. At least one resident believes that the graves unique in the region because many are not oriented toward Mecca, and therefore must pre-date Islam.[40]

Terraced
Graves are terraced in Yagoto Cemetery, which is an urban cemetery situated in a hilly area in Nagoya, Japan, effectively creating stone walls blanketing hillsides.[41]

Miscellaneous
The Cross Bones is a burial ground for prostitutes in London. The Neptune Memorial Reef is an underwater columbarium near Key Biscayne.[42]

Online memorials
In the 2000s and 2010s, it has become increasingly common for cemeteries and funeral homes to offer online services. There are also stand-alone online "cemeteries" such as DiscoverEverAfter Find a Grave, Canadian Headstones, Interment.net, and the World Wide Cemetery.[43][44]

Customs and practices

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Flowers

Flowers left on the grave of Édith Piaf
In Western countries, and many others,[quantify] visitors to graves commonly leave cut flowers, especially during major holidays and on birthdays or relevant anniversaries. Cemeteries usually dispose of these flowers after a few weeks in order to keep the space maintained. Some companies offer perpetual flower services, to ensure a grave is always decorated with fresh flowers.[45] Flowers may often be planted on the grave as well, usually immediately in front of the gravestone. For this purpose roses are highly common.

In some regions flowers are put out at specific times called Decoration Days.

Stones

Small stones on a gravestone in a Jewish cemetery in Germany
Visitors to loved ones interred in Jewish cemeteries often leave a small stone on the top of the headstone. There are prayers said at the gravesite, and the stone is left on the visitor's departure. It is done as a show of respect; as a general rule, flowers are not placed at Jewish graves. Flowers are fleeting; the symbology inherent in the use of a stone is to show that the love, honor, memories, and soul of the loved one are eternal. This practice is seen in the closing scene of the film Schindler's List, although in that case it is not on a Jewish grave.

Crosses

Wooden crosses with remembrance poppies on them
War graves will commonly have small timber remembrance crosses left with a red poppy attached to its centre. These will often have messages written on the cross. More formal visits will often leave a poppy wreath. Jewish war graves are sometimes marked by a timber Star of David.

Candles

Grave candles in the Old Cemetery in Łódź, Poland
Placing burning grave candles on the cemetery to commemorate the dead is a very common tradition in Catholic nations, for example, Poland. It is mostly practised on All Souls' Day. The traditional grave candles are called znicz in Polish.[46] A similar practice of grave candles is also used in Eastern Orthodox Christian nations, as well as the Lutheran Christian Nordic countries.

Toys
In the American South, graves of children are often decorated with emblems of childhood. These include favorite toys, balloons, seasonal decorations, religious figurines, and more.[47]

Contemporary management

Volunteers cleaning a gravestone in Tuscaloosa, Alabama in 2023
Traditionally, cemetery management only involves the allocation of land for burial, the digging and filling of graves, and the maintenance of the grounds and landscaping. The construction and maintenance of headstones and other grave monuments are usually the responsibilities of surviving families and friends. However, increasingly, many people regard the resultant collection of individual headstones, concrete slabs and fences (some of which may be decayed or damaged) to be aesthetically unappealing, leading to new cemetery developments either standardising the shape or design of headstones or plaques, sometimes by providing a standard shaped marker as part of the service provided by the cemetery.

Grave digging
Cemetery authorities normally employ a full-time staff of caretakers to dig graves. The term gravedigger is still used in casual speech, though many cemeteries have adopted the term caretaker, since their duties often involve maintenance of the cemetery grounds and facilities. The employment of skilled personnel for the preparation of graves is done not only to ensure the grave is dug in the correct location and at the correct depth, but also to relieve families from having to dig the grave for a recently dead relative, and as a matter of public safety, in order to prevent inexperienced visitors from injuring themselves, to ensure unused graves are properly covered, and to avoid legal liability that would result from an injury related to an improperly dug or uncovered grave.

Preparation of the grave usually begins before mourners arrive for the burial. The cemetery caretakers fill the grave after the burial, generally after the mourners have departed. Mechanical equipment, such as backhoes, are used to reduce labour cost of digging and filling, but some hand shovelling may still be required.

In the United Kingdom the minimum depth from the surface to the highest lid is 36 inches (91 cm). There must be 6 inches (15 cm) between each coffin, which on average is 15 inches (38 cm) high. If the soil is free-draining and porous, only 24 inches (61 cm) of soil on top is required. Coffins may be interred at lesser depths or even above ground as long as they are encased in a concrete chamber.[48] Before 1977, double graves were dug to 8 feet (240 cm) and singles to 6 feet (180 cm). As a single grave is now dug to 54 inches (140 cm), old cemeteries contain many areas where new single graves can be dug on "old ground". This is considered a valid method of resource management and provides income to keep older cemeteries viable, thus forestalling the need for permanent closure, which would result in a reduction of their work force.

Cemetery key

Brass cemetery key of a pastor, with handover document and sheath — around 1935
The key is a central element of Christianity.[49] Keys of death and hell as a metaphor and synonym for these often stands the cemetery key. Today it is also integrated in many games as the "graveyard key holder".[50]

Burial registers
Usually there is a legal requirement to maintain records regarding the burials (or interment of ashes) within a cemetery. These burial registers usually contain (at a minimum) the name of the person buried, the date of burial and the location of the burial plots within the cemetery, although some contain far more detail. The Arlington National Cemetery, one of the United States' largest military cemeteries, has a registry, The ANC Explorer, which contains details such as photographs of the front and back of the tombstones.[51] Burial registers are an important resource for genealogy.

Land use
In order to physically manage the space within the cemetery (to avoid burials in existing graves) and to record locations in the burial register, most cemeteries have some systematic layout of graves in rows, generally grouped into larger sections as required. Often the cemetery displays this information in the form of a map, which is used both by the cemetery administration in managing their land use and also by friends and family members seeking to locate a particular grave within the cemetery.[3]

Pressures

A tomb retrofitted as a residence in the City of the Dead. Cairo's City of the Dead is a centuries-old cemetery that has become home to as many as 1 million Egyptians during the last decades.[52]
Cemetery authorities face a number of tensions in regard to the management of cemeteries.

One issue relates to cost. Traditionally, a single payment is made at the time of burial, but the cemetery authority incurs expenses in cemetery maintenance over many decades. Many cemetery authorities find that their accumulated funds are not sufficient for the costs of long-term maintenance. This shortfall in funds for maintenance results in three main options: charge much higher prices for new burials, obtain some other kind of public subsidy, or neglect maintenance. For cemeteries without space for new burials, the options are even more limited. Public attitudes towards subsidies are highly variable. People with family buried in local cemeteries are usually quite concerned about neglect of cemetery maintenance and will usually argue in favour of public subsidy of local cemetery maintenance, whereas other people without personal connection to the cemetery often argue that public subsidies of private cemeteries is an inappropriate use of their taxes. Some jurisdictions require a certain amount of money be set aside in perpetuity and invested so that the interest earned can be used for maintenance.[53]

Another issue relates to limited amount of land. In many larger towns and cities, the older cemeteries which were initially considered to be large often run out of space for new burials and there is no vacant adjacent land available to extend the cemetery or even land in the same general area to create new cemeteries. New cemeteries are generally established on the periphery of towns and cities, where large tracts of land are still available. However, people often wish to be buried in the same cemetery as other relatives, and are not interested in being buried in new cemeteries with which there is no sense of connection to their family, creating pressure to find more space in existing cemeteries.

A third issue is the maintenance of monuments and headstones, which are generally the responsibility of families, but often become neglected over time. Decay and damage through vandalism or cemetery maintenance practices can render monuments and headstones either unsafe or at least unsightly. On the other hand, some families do not forget the grave but constantly visit, leaving behind flowers, plants, and other decorative items that create their own maintenance problem.

Re-use of graves
See also: Desecration of graves

Cemetery excavations, like this one in Madrid, can alleviate overcrowding.
All of these issues tend to put pressure on the re-use of grave sites within cemeteries. The re-use of graves already used for burial can cause considerable upset to family members. Although the authorities might declare that the grave is sufficiently old that there will be no human remains still present, nonetheless many people regard the re-use of graves (particularly their family's graves) as a desecration. Also re-use of a used grave involves the removal of any monuments and headstones, which may cause further distress to families (although families will typically be allowed to take away the monuments and headstones if they wish).

On the other hand, cemetery authorities are well aware that many old graves are forgotten and not visited and that their re-use will not cause distress to anyone. However, there may be some older graves in a cemetery for whom there are local and vocal descendants who will mount a public campaign against re-use. One pragmatic strategy is to publicly announce plans to re-use older graves and invite families to respond if they are willing or not. Re-use then only occurs where there are no objections allowing the "forgotten" graves to be re-used. Sometimes the cemetery authorities request a further payment to avoid re-use of a grave, but often this backfires politically.

A practical problem with regard to contacting families is that the person who initially purchased the burial plot(s) may have subsequently died and locating living family members, if any, many decades later is virtually impossible (or at least prohibitively expensive). Public notice about the proposed re-use of graves may or may not reach family members living further afield who may object to such practices. Therefore, it is possible that re-use could occur without family awareness.

Some cemeteries did foresee the need for re-use and included in their original terms and conditions a limited tenure on a grave site and most new cemeteries follow this practice, having seen the problems faced by older cemeteries. Common practice in Europe is to place bones in an ossuary after the proscribed burial period is over.[53]

However, even when the cemetery has the legal right to re-use a grave, strong public opinion often forces the authorities to back down on that re-use. Also, even when cemeteries have a limited tenure provision in place, funding shortages can force them to contemplate re-use earlier than the original arrangements provided for.

Another type of grave site considered for re-use are empty plots purchased years ago but never used. In principle it would seem easier to "re-use" such grave sites as there can be no claims of desecration, but often this is made complicated by the legal rights to be buried obtained by the pre-purchase, as any limited tenure clause only takes effect after there has been a burial. Again, cemetery authorities suspect that in many cases the holders of these burial rights are probably dead and that nobody will exercise that burial right, but again some families are aware of the burial rights they possess and do intend to exercise them as and when family members die. Again the difficulty of being unable to locate the holders of these burial rights complicates the re-use of those graves.

As historic cemeteries begin to reach their capacity for full burials, alternative memorialization, such as collective memorials for cremated individuals, is becoming more common. Different cultures have different attitudes to destruction of cemeteries and use of the land for construction. In some countries it is considered normal to destroy the graves, while in others the graves are traditionally respected for a century or more. In many cases, after a suitable period of time has elapsed, the headstones are removed and the now former cemetery is converted to a recreational park or construction site. A more recent trend, particularly in South American cities, involves constructing high-rise buildings to house graves.[54]

Cemeteries in the US may be relocated if the land is required for other reasons. For instance, many cemeteries in the southeastern United States were relocated by the Tennessee Valley Authority from areas about to be flooded by dam construction.[55] Cemeteries may also be moved so that the land can be reused for transportation structures,[56][57] public buildings,[58] or even private development.[59] Cemetery relocation is not necessarily possible in other parts of the world; in Alberta, Canada, for instance, the Cemetery Act expressly forbids the relocation of cemeteries or the mass exhumation of marked graves for any reason whatsoever.[60] This has caused significant problems in the provision of transportation services to the southern half of Calgary, as the main southbound road connecting the south end of the city with downtown threads through a series of cemeteries founded in the 1930s. The light rail transit line running to the south end eventually had to be built directly under the road.

In Singapore, burials are limited to 15 years before graves are exhumed. This has led to a preference of cremation over burial among Singaporeans.[61][62]

Superstitions

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Cemetery gate, Galisteo, New Mexico
In many countries, cemeteries are places believed to hold both superstition and legend characteristics, being used, usually at night times, as an altar in supposed black magic ceremonies or similarly clandestine happenings, such as devil worshipping, grave-robbing (gold teeth and jewelry are preferred), thrilling sex encounters, or drug and alcohol abuse not related to the cemetery aura.

The legend of zombies, as romanticized by Wade Davis in The Serpent and the Rainbow, is not exceptional among cemetery myths, as cemeteries are believed to be places where witches and sorcerers get skulls and bones needed for their sinister rituals.[63]

In the Afro-Brazilian urban mythos (such as Umbanda), there is a character loosely related to cemeteries and its aura: the Zé Pilintra (in fact, Zé Pilintra is more related to bohemianism and night life than with cemeteries, where the reigning entity is Exu Caveira or Exu Cemitério, similar to Voodoo Baron Samedi).[4]

Gallery
Old graveyard in Elazığ, Turkey.
Old graveyard in Elazığ, Turkey.
Cemetery in Franconia, Germany.
Cemetery in Franconia, Germany.
Graveyard at the Basilica of the Holy Rosary in Bandel, West Bengal.
Graveyard at the Basilica of the Holy Rosary in Bandel, West Bengal.
Holland Cemetery, a rural cemetery in northeast Oklahoma.
Holland Cemetery, a rural cemetery in northeast Oklahoma.
A village cemetery in Jednorożec, Poland.
A village cemetery in Jednorożec, Poland.
Jewish cemetery "Heiliger Sand" in Worms, Germany.
Jewish cemetery "Heiliger Sand" in Worms, Germany.
Prague's Old Jewish Cemetery is the last resting place for more than 100,000 people who had been buried here since the 15th century.
Prague's Old Jewish Cemetery is the last resting place for more than 100,000 people who had been buried here since the 15th century.
A belltower at Forest Home Cemetery, in Fifield, Wisconsin. Tolling bells during funerals has been customary in some places around the world.
A belltower at Forest Home Cemetery, in Fifield, Wisconsin. Tolling bells during funerals has been customary in some places around the world.
Manila American Cemetery and Memorial, the largest American military cemetery outside of the United States.
Manila American Cemetery and Memorial, the largest American military cemetery outside of the United States.
See also
icon	Architecture portal
icon	Society portal
Corpse road
Pet cemetery
Prison cemetery
Lists of cemeteries by country
Catacomb
Churchyard
Coemeterium
Columbarium
Crypt
Grave field
Mass grave
Necropolis
Ossuary
Tomb
Tumulus
Unmarked grave
War grave
References
 κοιμητήριον. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project
 Harper, Douglas. "cemetery". Online Etymology Dictionary.
 "cemetery". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.)
 Upendran, S. (October 25, 2011). "Know Your English: Difference between 'graveyard' and 'cemetery'". The Hindu. Archived from the original on June 19, 2018. Retrieved December 24, 2013.
 "What's the Difference Between Cemetery and Graveyard". WhatDifferenceBetween. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023.
 Klevnäs, Alison; Aspöck, Edeltraud; Noterman, Astrid A.; van Haperen, Martine C.; Zintl, Stephanie (August 2021). "Reopening graves in the early Middle Ages: from local practice to European phenomenon". Antiquity: A Review of World Archaeology. 95 (382). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 1005–1026. doi:10.15184/aqy.2020.217. eISSN 1745-1744. ISSN 0003-598X.
 "Paris' Secret Underworld ". CBS News. September 27, 2004
 Meller, Hugh (1981). London Cemeteries: An Illustrated Guide and Gazetteer. Amersham: Avebury. ISBN 978-0861270033.
 Melanie Louise Simo (1988) Loudon and the Landscape, p. 283.
 "Friends of Beckett Street Cemetery". beckettstreetcemetery.org.uk. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved January 5, 2022.
 Rebecca Greenfield (March 16, 2011). "Our First Public Parks: The Forgotten History of Cemeteries". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2021.
 Blanche Linden-Ward (1989). "12 Strange but Genteel Pleasure Grounds: Tourist and Leisure Uses of Nineteenth-Century Rural Cemeteries". Cemeteries & Gravemarkers. University Press of Colorado, Utah State University Press. pp. 293–328. doi:10.2307/j.ctt46nqxw.19. ISBN 9780874211603. JSTOR j.ctt46nqxw.19. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2021.
 Lomax, John Nova. "The Seoul of Houston: The Weather Was Not the Strong Point on Long Point Archived 2008-08-29 at the Wayback Machine." Houston Press. January 30, 2008.
 Mytum 2004, p. 50.
 Worpole 2003, pp. 11–12.
 Nonini 2014, p. 390.
 Flanders 2014, p. 220.
 Carroll 2013, p. 362.
 Upton 1997, p. 131–132.
 Taylor & Allen 2006, pp. 342–342.
 Meuser 2010, p. 137.
 Flanders 2014, pp. 219–221.
 Worpole 2003, p. 8.
 Worpole 2003, p. 173.
 Forman 2014, pp. 357–358.
 Keels 2003, p. 21.
 van Rensslaer, M. G. (June 3, 1891). "Garden and Forest". Sir Christopher Wren as Gardener: 254–255.
 LeeDecker 2009, pp. 145, 148.
 Thomas 2003, p. 32.
 Mickey 2013, p. 17.
 Vercelloni & Vercelloni 2010, p. 198.
 Hodgson 2001, p. 30.
 Brophy, Alfred (2016). "The Road to the Gettysburg Address" (PDF). Florida State University Law Review. 43: 831–905. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2016.
 Harney 2014, p. 102.
 Mytum 2004, p. 51.
 Rugg, Julie (2006). "Lawn cemeteries: the emergence of a new landscape of death". Urban History. 33 (2): 213–233. doi:10.1017/S0963926806003786. ISSN 0963-9268. S2CID 145306627.
 Sears, John F. (1989). Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the Nineteenth Century. University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 117–118. ISBN 978-1558491625. Retrieved July 25, 2013. First introduced in 1855 by Adolph Strauch, superintendent of the Spring Grove Cemetery in Cincinnati, the park or lawn cemetery featured open, uncluttered expanses of lawn rather than the uneven, wooded, picturesque scenery of the rural cemetery. [...] By the final decades of the nineteenth century, the park cemetery would become the dominant form of American burial ground.
 Holden, Matthew H.; McDonald-Madden, Eve (2018). "Conservation from the Grave: Human Burials to Fund the Conservation of Threatened Species". Conservation Letters. 11 (1): e12421. Bibcode:2018ConL...11E2421H. doi:10.1111/conl.12421. ISSN 1755-263X.
 Brophy, Alfred (2006). "Grave Matters: The Ancient Rights of the Graveyard". BYU Law Review. 2006 (6). Article 2. Archived from the original on November 9, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2016. The "ancient right" of the graveyard is that descendants of those buried on private property have – in many states – an implied easement "in gross" to visit that cemetery. The boundaries of this right, in terms of how frequently descendants (and in a few states other interested people) may visit and for how long, vary by state. In a few southern states, this is provided by legislation; in more states, it is protected by common law decisions. In some states, the right is not yet established by either statute or cases, although it seems likely that in an appropriate challenge most, maybe all, states will recognize at least limited rights of access. See Brophy, supra.
 "Tradition of Family Cemeteries Disappearing From Tribal Areas". Arab News. September 9, 2006. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved October 5, 2012.
 "名古屋市の霊園 a giant terraced cemetery in Nagoya – 元東京人の名古屋まち歩き". Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved January 5, 2022.
 "About the Reef" Archived February 2, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Neptune Memorial Reef.
 Lives Lived: Michael Stanley Kibbee, M.Sc., P.Eng. The Globe and Mail, March 20, 1997.
 "Internet WayBack Machine (World Wide Cemetery)". Archived from the original on March 15, 2017. Retrieved March 14, 2017.
 ""City cemetery draws visitors for 150 years"". Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013.
 "Zaduszkowe tradycje". TVP Białystok (in Polish). November 2, 2012. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2015.
 Jeane, D. Gregory (2009). "Cemeteries". In Hinson, Glenn; Ferris, William (eds.). The New Encyclopedia of Southern Culture: Volume 14: Folklife. UNC Press. p. 61.
 Local Authorities Cemeteries Order 1977
 "Streit um einen Friedhofsschlüssel". gnz.de (in German). Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved April 8, 2021.
 "Final Fantasy 7 Remake | Alle Aufträge und Nebenstorys". spieletipps.de. October 4, 2020. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2021.
 "Arlington National Cemetery Records Go Online". OnlineSearches. November 1, 2012. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013.
 "Tomb with a view". bbc.co.uk. BBC News. March 6, 2002. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011.
 "Can Your Cemetery Really Bury You Forever?". Planet Money. NPR. April 18, 2018. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021 – via YouTube.
 "New trend: Cemetery Skyscrapers". Emporis. Archived from the original on November 11, 2006.
 "Cemeteries Relocated by TVA". TVA.org. Tennessee Valley Authority. Archived from the original on August 26, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2009.
 "O'Hare Growth May Mean Moving a Cemetery". NPR.org. November 19, 2005. Archived from the original on December 7, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2009.
 St. Johannes Cemetery Relocation. Archived July 8, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Accessed July 13, 2009.
 "Remains in 19th century graves downtown ID'd as soldiers". Archived May 31, 2016, at the Wayback Machine The Tucson Citizen, April 17, 2009. Accessed July 13, 2009.
 "Cemetery Relocation Battle Ongoing". Archived May 9, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Platte County Citizen, July 4, 2007. Accessed July 13, 2009.
 "Cemeteries registration". alberta.ca. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved January 5, 2022.
 "Singapore Cremation Statistics 2018". cremation.org.uk. The Cremation Society of Great Britain. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved December 21, 2020.
 "Crypt Burial System". nea.gov.sg. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. The New Burial Policy, introduced in 1998 to address the issue of land scarcity, limits burial to 15 years. After this period, graves will be exhumed and the remains cremated or re-interred, depending on one's religious requirements.
 Davis, Wade (1985). The Serpent and the Rainbow. Simon & Schuster (August 5, 1997). ISBN 9780684839295.
Bibliography
Cantor, Norman L. (2010). After We Die: The Life and Times of the Human Cadaver. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-1589017139.
Carmack, Sharon DeBartolo (2002). Your Guide to Cemetery Research. Betterway Books. ISBN 978-1558705890.
Carroll, Andrew (2013). Here Is Where: Discovering America's Great Forgotten History. New York: Crown Archetype. ISBN 978-0307463999.
Colvin, Howard (1991). Architecture and the After-Life. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Curl, James Stevens (2002). Death and Architecture. Gloucestershire: Sutton.
Eggener, Keith (2010). Cemeteries. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0393731699.
Etlin, Richard A. (1984). The Architecture of Death: the transformation of the cemetery in eighteenth-century Paris. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flanders, Judith (2014). The Victorian City: Everyday Life in Dickens' London. New York: Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 978-1250040213.
Forman, Richard T.T. (2014). Urban Ecology: Science of Cities. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1107007000.
Grossman, Janet Burnett (2001). Greek Funerary Sculpture. Catalogue of the Collection at the Getty Villa. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum.
Harney, Marion (2014). Gardens and Landscapes in Historic Building Conservation. Chichester, West Sussex, U.K.: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1118508121.
Hodgson, Larry (2001). The Garden Lover's Guide to Canada. New York: Princeton Architectural Press. ISBN 978-1568982793.
Keels, Thomas H. (2003). Philadelphia Graveyards and Cemeteries. Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia. ISBN 978-0738512297.
LeeDecker, Charles H. (2009). "Preparing for an Afterlife of Earth: The Transformation of Mortuary Behavior in Nineteenth-Century North America". In Majewski, Teresita; Gaimster, David R. M. (eds.). International Handbook of Historical Archaeology. New York: Springer. ISBN 978-0387720685.
Meuser, Helmut (2010). Contaminated Urban Soils. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. ISBN 978-9048193271.
Mickey, Thomas J. (2013). America's Romance With the English Garden. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press. ISBN 978-0821420355.
Mytum, Harold (2004). Mortuary Monuments and Burial Grounds of the Historic Period. New York: Kluwer Academic Publishing. ISBN 978-0306480751.
Nonini, Donald Macon (2014). A Companion to Urban Anthropology. Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1118378649.
Salisbury, Mike. "From My Death May Life Come Forth. A Feasibility Study of the Woodland Cemetery in Canada". Earthartist.com.
Taylor, Richard; Allen, Alistair (2006). "Waste Disposal and Landfill: Potential Hazards and Information Needs". In Schmoll, Oliver; Howard, Guy; Chilton, John; Chorus, Ingrid (eds.). Protecting Groundwater for Health: Managing the Quality of Drinking-Water Sources. Cornwall, U.K.: World Health Organisation. ISBN 978-1843390794.
Thomas, Jeannie B. (2003). Naked Barbies, Warrior Joes, and Other Forms of Visible Gender. Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0252028540.
Upton, Dell (1997). "The Urban Cemetery and the Urban Community: The Origin of the New Orleans Cemetery". In adams, Annmarie; McMurry, Sally Ann (eds.). Exploring Everyday Landscapes. Knoxville, Tenn.: University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 978-0870499838.
Vercelloni, Matteo; Vercelloni, Virgilio (2010). Inventing the Garden. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum. ISBN 978-1606060476.
Worpole, Ken (2003). Last Landscapes: the architecture of the cemetery in the West. London: Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1861891617.
Further reading
Burch, Audra D. S. (October 15, 2022). "Nearly 'Erased by History': African Americans Search for Lost Graves. Families and volunteers seek out and restore abandoned cemeteries as a way of recovering their own personal stories". The New York Times.
External links

Look up cemetery in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cemeteries.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Cemetery.

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Cemeteries.
vte
Death
vte
Real estate developments
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: CemeteriesDeath customsPlanned developments
This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 23:23 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Cemetery

114 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Duties and functions

Executive assistant
Civilian
Military
Education, training, and entering the profession
Origin

Etymology
See also
References
Further reading
External links
Secretary

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the occupation of an assistant. For the position of leadership, see Secretary (title). For the position known as secretary that operates within the cabinet of a government's executive branch, see Cabinet members. For other uses, see Secretary (disambiguation).

Katie Johnson, left, personal secretary to the president of the United States, with Barack Obama at the White House in 2009[1][2][3]
A secretary, administrative assistant, executive assistant, personal secretary,[4] or other similar titles is an individual whose work consists of supporting management, including executives, using a variety of project management, program evaluation, communication, and/or organizational skills within the area of administration. There is a diverse array of work experiences attainable within the administrative support field, ranging between internship, entry-level, associate, junior, mid-senior, and senior level pay bands with positions in nearly every industry, especially among white-collar careers.

The functions of a personal assistant may be entirely carried out to assist one other employee or may be for the benefit of more than one. In other situations, a secretary is an officer of a society or organization who deals with correspondence, admits new members, and organizes official meetings and events. But this role should not be confused with the role of an executive secretary, cabinet secretary such as cabinet members who hold the title of "secretary", or company secretary, all which differ from an administrative assistant.[5][6][7]

Duties and functions

Reggie Love, left, personal aide to the president of the United States from 2009 to 2011[8][9][10]
A secretary, also known as a personal assistant (PA) or administrative assistant, can have many administrative duties. The title "secretary," with its root meaning of "keeper of secrets," is not used as often as in decades past, and responsibilities have evolved in response to the technological age.[11] The duties may vary according to the nature and size of the company or organization, and might include managing budgets, bookkeeping, attending telephone calls, handling visitors, maintaining websites, travel arrangements, event planning, and preparing expense reports. Secretaries might also manage all the administrative details of running a high-level conference or meeting and be responsible for arranging the catering for a lunch meeting. Often executives will ask their assistant to take the minutes at meetings and prepare meeting documents for review.[12] In addition to the minutes, the secretary may be responsible for keeping all of the official records of a company or organization.[6] A secretary is also regarded as an "office manager".

Today, many secretaries also conduct research, briefings, write memoranda, content writing, handle project management, program evaluation, stakeholder management, customer service duties, devise and maintain office systems including data management and filing, carry out background research and present findings, produce documents like white papers and gray literature, carry out specific projects, take on some of the manager's responsibilities, get involved in decision-making processes, handle public relations tasks, and/or logistics and procurement along with a wide range of other duties related to their specific industry.

In a business, many job descriptions overlap. However, while administrative assistant is a generic term, not necessarily implying directly working for a superior, a secretary is usually the key person for all administrative tasks, and often referred to as the "gate keeper". Other titles describing jobs similar to or overlapping those of the traditional secretary are Office Coordinator, Executive Assistant, Office Manager and Administrative Professional.

List of job titles synonymous with or similar to secretary: secretary, administrative professional, administrative assistant, executive assistant, administrative officer, administrative support specialist, clerk, military assistant, military aid[13], management assistant, office secretary, program assistant,[14] project assistant, personal aid, body man/body women, personal secretary, or personal assistant.[4]
In previous decades, especially in the 20th century and before, at the most basic level a secretary is usually an audio typist with a small number of administrative roles. A good command of the prevailing office language and the ability to type is essential. At higher grades and with more experience they begin to take on additional roles and spend more of their time maintaining physical and electronic files, dealing with the post, photocopying, emailing clients, ordering stationery and answering telephones.[15]

Secretary at work, photo taken in 2007
A more skilled executive assistant may be required to type at high speeds using technical or foreign languages, organize diaries, itineraries and meetings and carry out administrative duties which may include accountancy or financial accounting. A secretary / executive assistant may also control access to a manager, thus becoming an influential and trusted aide. Executive assistants are available for contact during off hours by new electronic communication methods for consultations.
The largest difference between a generalized secretary and skilled executive assistants is that the executive assistant is required to be able to interact extensively with the general public, vendors, customers, and any other person or group that the executive is responsible to interact with. As the level that the executive interacts with increases so does the level of skill required in the executive assistant that works with the executive. Those executive assistants that work with corporate officers must be capable of emulating the style, corporate philosophy, and corporate persona of the executive for which they work. In the modern workplace the advancement of the executive assistants is codependent on the success of the executive and the ability of both to make the job performance of the team seamless whereas the job place evaluation is reflective of each other's performance executive secretary for now.
This should be distinguished from the company secretary, a senior role within a company responsible for compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements.

Executive assistant
Civilian
The work of an executive assistant (sometimes called a management assistant) differs a great deal from that of an administrative assistant. In many organizations, an executive assistant is a high-ranking position in the administrative hierarchy. Executive assistants work for a company officer or executive (at both private and public company institutions), and possess the authority to make crucial decisions affecting the direction of such organizations. As such, executive assistants play a role in decision-making and policy setting. The executive assistant performs the usual roles of managing correspondence, preparing research, and communication, often with one or more administrative assistants or scheduling assistants who report to him or her. The executive assistant also acts as the "gatekeeper", understanding in varying degree the requirements of the executive, and with an ability through this understanding to decide which scheduled events, meetings, teleconferences, or e-mails are most appropriate for allocation of the executive's time.

An executive assistant may, from time to time, act as proxy for the executives, representing him/her/them in meetings or communications and project managing the production of reports or other deliverables in the absence of the executive. An executive assistant differs from an administrative assistant (a job which is often part of the career path of an executive assistant) in that they are expected to possess a higher degree of business acumen, be able to manage projects, as well as have the ability to influence others on behalf of the executive. In the past, executive assistants were required to have a high school diploma only, but increasingly jobs are requiring a bachelor's degree[16] of any field of study or when complying with educational requirements within their given industry, may require specialized knowledge in a specific fields of study through a bachelor's degree pertinent to the employer's industry or division's role within the organization.

Military

United States Coast Guard military aide Lieutenant Commander Jayna McCarron, left, serving as part of the White House Military Office is seen meeting with U.S. President Joe Biden about Medal of Honor recipients, Wednesday, October 6, 2021, in the Oval Office
In the U.S. Department of Defense, the title of military assistant (MA) or executive assistant (EA) is typically held by Army, Air Force, and Marine Corps colonels, lieutenant colonels, and senior majors and Navy captains, commanders and senior lieutenant commanders who are in direct support of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense and other civilian defense officials down to the level of a Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, as well as general officers or flag officers.

The Secretary of Defense also has a lieutenant general or vice admiral as his/her senior military assistant.

Like their civilian counterparts, EAs are also a resource in decision-making, policy setting, and will have leadership oversight of the entire military and civilian staff supporting the civilian official, general officer, or flag officer. EAs are often interchangeable with other senior military officers of equivalent rank holding the title of chief of staff in other service organizations headed by a flag officer or general officer. In the case of unified combatant commands and service major commands, the Chief of Staff is often a general officer or flag officer himself/herself, typically at the 1-star or 2-star level, but he or she should not be confused with the 4-star officers holding the title of Chief of Staff of the Army or Chief of Staff of the Air Force.[17]

Education, training, and entering the profession
In the late 19th century, the invention of the typewriter provided many new job openings in business and government for women and men. At Chicago's Metropolitan Business College in the 1892-1893 were female; in the shorthand and typing courses, however, 90 percent of the students were female.[18] For most of the 20th century, women with shorthand or typing skills could get secretarial jobs without further education beyond high school.

Origin
The role of secretary emerged from European church and state bureaucracies as aspects of the role of chancellor became distinct, and encompassed managing the work of a number of clerks gathered in the chancery. From the Renaissance until the late 19th century, men involved in the daily correspondence and the activities of the powerful had assumed the title of secretary.


Der Gemeindeschreiber (the town clerk), painting by Albert Anker, 1874
With time, like many titles, the term was applied to more and varied functions, leading to compound titles to specify various secretarial work better, like general secretary or financial secretary. Just "secretary" remained in use either as an abbreviation when clear in the context or for relatively modest positions such as administrative assistant of the officer(s) in charge, either individually or as member of a secretariat. As such less influential posts became more feminine and common with the multiplication of bureaucracies in the public and private sectors, new words were also coined to describe them, such as personal assistant.

In the 1840s and 1850s commercial schools were emerging to train male and female students the skills needed to work in a clerical position.[19] In 1870, Sir Isaac Pitman founded a school where students could qualify as shorthand writers to "professional and commercial men". Originally, this school was only for male students. In 1871, there were more than 150 such schools operating in the United States, a number that grew to as many as 500 by the 1890s.[20]

In the 1880s, with the invention of the typewriter, more women began to enter the field and during the upcoming years, especially since World War I, the role of secretary has been primarily associated with women. By the 1930s, fewer men were entering the field of secretaries.


Thomas de Keyser, Portrait of Constantijn Huygens with his Secretary, 1627
In an effort to promote professionalism among United States secretaries, the National Secretaries Association was created in 1942. Today, this organization is known as the International Association of Administrative Professionals (IAAP). The organization developed the first standardized test for office workers called the Certified Professional Secretaries Examination (CPS). It was first administered in 1951.

By the mid-20th century the need for secretaries was great and offices and organizations featured large secretarial pools. In some cases the demand was great enough to spur secretaries being recruited from overseas; in particular, there was often a steady demand for young British women to come to the U.S. and fill temporary or permanent secretarial positions.[21] Several organizations were created to assist secretaries from foreign lands, including the Society of International Secretaries and the Association of British Secretaries in America.[22]

In 1952 Mary Barrett, president of the National Secretaries Association, C. King Woodbridge, president of Dictaphone Corporation, and American businessman Harry F. Klemfuss created a special Secretary's Day holiday, to recognize the hard work of the staff in the office. The holiday caught on, and during the fourth week of April is now celebrated in offices all over the world. It has been renamed "Administrative Professional's Week" to highlight the increased responsibility of today's secretary and other administrative workers, and to avoid embarrassment to those who believe that "secretary" refers only to women or to unskilled workers.

In the 20th century, with the spread of the typewriter, shorthand saw competition from steno-typing. Typing thus became the prerogative of women, widows or relatively well-educated young girls, originally from the middle class or the petty bourgeoisie, then from working-class backgrounds with the rise of the profession between the two world wars, which saw the women seize these innovations.[23][24]


Secretary typist in 1951
Until recent years, the profession of secretary in the original sense was often subject, in the collective imagination, to stereotypes and pejorative connotations. Indeed, secretarial work was easily associated with low-value, thankless, and badly paid tasks, such as serving coffee to superiors, making photocopies or filing menial documents. In addition, the profession was once exercised almost exclusively by women and considered a pink-collar job in previous decades, but in the 21st century many employers began re-classifying many entry-level positions, including white-collar jobs historically held by men in decades past, as secretary, administrative assistant, or program assistant roles.[23][24]

Etymology

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
The term is derived from the Latin word secernere, "to distinguish" or "to set apart", the passive participle (secretum) meaning "having been set apart", with the eventual connotation of something private or confidential, as with the English word secret. A secretarius was a person, therefore, overseeing business confidentially, usually for a powerful individual (a king, pope, etc.). As the duties of a modern secretary often still include the handling of confidential information, the literal meaning of their title still holds true.[25]

See also
Clerk
Cabinet secretary or Department secretary
Office lady
Receptionist
References
 "Three Wellesley alumnae tapped for Obama administration". The Wellesley Townsman. Wellesley, Massachusetts: GateHouse Media. January 20, 2009. Retrieved January 22, 2009.
 "Three Wellesley alumnae tapped for Obama administration". The Wellesley Townsman. Wellesley, Massachusetts: GateHouse Media. January 20, 2009. Retrieved January 22, 2009.
 Parnes, Amie (June 16, 2011). "White House staffers depart for Harvard". Politico. Retrieved June 21, 2011.
 "Example job description and person specification for a school library assistant". CILIP Guidelines for Secondary School Libraries: 121–122. doi:10.29085/9781783300303.017.
 "Secretary Job Information | National Careers Service". Nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk. January 27, 2012. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
 Robert, Henry M.; et al. (2011). Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (11th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Da Capo Press. pp. 458–460. ISBN 978-0-306-82020-5.
 Robert III, Henry M.; et al. (2011). Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised In Brief (2nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Da Capo Press. pp. 142–151. ISBN 978-0-306-82019-9. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2015.
 Staff report (April 21, 2011). "Two-sport athlete charged with DWI". Duke Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 1, 2013. Retrieved August 16, 2013.
 Martin, Nick (February 4, 2015). "Love details time with President Obama in new book "Power Forward"". Duke Chronicle. Retrieved December 20, 2016.
 Kantor, Jodi (November 11, 2011). "Leaving Obama's Shadow, to Cast One of His Own". The New York Times. p. A24. Retrieved April 23, 2014.
 Smith, Noah. "Secretary Jobs in the Age of AI". Noahpinion. Substack. Retrieved February 19, 2024.
 "Secretaries and Administrative Assistants : Occupational Outlook Handbook : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics". Bls.gov. March 29, 2012. Retrieved December 8, 2013.
 Military aides still carry the president's nuclear 'football', USATODAY.com
 content.external (April 11, 2022). "Program Assistant Job Description". Recruiting Resources: How to Recruit and Hire Better. Retrieved February 8, 2023.
 "Secretaries/typists". NHS Careers. Retrieved January 1, 2012.
 Rampell, Catherine (September 9, 2014). "The college degree has become the new high school degree". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 6, 2016.
 Military Assistant/Executive Officer Handbook. Retrieved on 11 June 2013.
 Lynn Peril: Swimming in the Steno Pool. Kapitel So You Want to Be a Secretary. Ebook-Position 702.
 Mullaney, Marie Marmo; Hilbert, Rosemary C. (February 2018). "Educating Women for Self-Reliance and Economic Opportunity: The Strategic Entrepreneurialism of the Katharine Gibbs Schools, 1911–1968". History of Education Quarterly. 58 (1): 65–93. doi:10.1017/heq.2017.49. ISSN 0018-2680.
 Weiss, J (1981). "Educating for clerical work: The nineteenth-century private commercial school". Journal of Social History. 14 (3): 416. doi:10.1353/jsh/14.3.407.
 Scot, Barbara (September 29, 1967). "Secretaries wanted across the Atlantic". The Glasgow Herald. p. 9.
 Seebohm, Caroline (July 19, 1971). "English Girls in New York: They Don't Go Home Again". New York. pp. 34–38.
 Sténographie, sténotypie ou dictaphone ?, fiche des Archives nationales françaises
 Jean Lebrun, « Histoire des secrétaires », émission La Marche de l'Histoire sur France Inter, 16 janvier 2013
 "Secretary – Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. August 31, 2012. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
Further reading
National Association of Parliamentarians, Education Committee (1993). Spotlight on You the Secretary. Independence, MO: National Association of Parliamentarians. ISBN 1-884048-25-0.
Covert, Bryce (May 4, 2015). "The Slow Death of the Secretary". The New Republic. Retrieved May 18, 2018.
The debate theorical-methodological in field of secretariat: diversities and singularities
Educational handbooks for professions occupied by females in the 1960s and 1970s.
External links

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Secretary.

Look up secretary in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
American Society of Administrative Professionals
Administrative Professional Resources
iaap – International Association of Administrative Professionals
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
Germany2United StatesJapanCzech Republic2Israel
Categories: Office and administrative support occupationsPrivate secretaries
This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 14:03 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Secretary

46 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Etymology and terminology
Distribution
Description

Biology

Evolution

Taxonomy and classification

Human interaction

See also
References
Further reading
External links
Deer

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(Redirected from Deer buck)
This article is about the ruminant animal. For other uses, see Deer (disambiguation).
"Fawn" and "Stag" redirect here. For other uses, see Fawn (disambiguation) and Stag (disambiguation).
Deer[1]
Temporal range: Early Miocene–Recent 
PreꞒꞒOSDCPTJKPgN

Images of a few members of the family Cervidae (clockwise from top left): the red deer (Cervus elaphus), sika deer (Cervus nippon), barasingha (Rucervus duvaucelii), caribou (Rangifer tarandus) and white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
Scientific classificationEdit this classification
Domain:	Eukaryota
Kingdom:	Animalia
Phylum:	Chordata
Class:	Mammalia
Order:	Artiodactyla
Infraorder:	Pecora
Family:	Cervidae
Goldfuss, 1820
Type genus
Cervus
Linnaeus, 1758
Subfamilies
Capreolinae
Cervinae
A deer (pl.: deer) or true deer is a hoofed ruminant ungulate of the family Cervidae (informally the deer family). Cervidae is divided into subfamilies Cervinae (which includes, among others, muntjac, elk (wapiti), red deer, and fallow deer) and Capreolinae (which includes, among others reindeer (caribou), white-tailed deer, roe deer, and moose). Male deer of almost all species (except the water deer), as well as female reindeer, grow and shed new antlers each year. These antlers are bony extensions of the skull and are often used for combat between males.

The musk deer (Moschidae) of Asia and chevrotains (Tragulidae) of tropical African and Asian forests are separate families that are also in the ruminant clade Ruminantia; they are not especially closely related to Cervidae.

Deer appear in art from Paleolithic cave paintings onwards, and they have played a role in mythology, religion, and literature throughout history, as well as in heraldry, such as red deer that appear in the coat of arms of Åland.[2] Their economic importance includes the use of their meat as venison, their skins as soft, strong buckskin, and their antlers as handles for knives. Deer hunting has been a popular activity since the Middle Ages and remains a resource for many families today.

Etymology and terminology

"The Stag Hunt of Frederick III, Elector of Saxony" by Lucas Cranach the Elder, 1529
The word deer was originally broad in meaning, becoming more specific with time. Old English dēor and Middle English der meant a wild animal of any kind. Cognates of Old English dēor in other dead Germanic languages have the general sense of animal, such as Old High German tior, Old Norse djur or dȳr, Gothic dius, Old Saxon dier, and Old Frisian diar.[3] This general sense gave way to the modern English sense by the end of the Middle English period, around 1500. All modern Germanic languages save English and Scots retain the more general sense: for example, Dutch/Frisian dier, German Tier, and Norwegian dyr mean 'animal'.[4]

For many types of deer in modern English usage, the male is a buck and the female a doe, but the terms vary with dialect, and according to the size of the species. The male red deer is a stag, while for other large species the male is a bull, the female a cow, as in cattle. In older usage, the male of any species is a hart, especially if over five years old, and the female is a hind, especially if three or more years old.[5] The young of small species is a fawn and of large species a calf; a very small young may be a kid. A castrated male is a havier.[6][7] A group of any species is a herd. The adjective of relation is cervine; like the family name Cervidae, this is from Latin: cervus, meaning 'stag' or 'deer'.

Distribution


Chital deer in Nagarahole, India
Deer live in a variety of biomes, ranging from tundra to the tropical rainforest. While often associated with forests, many deer are ecotone species that live in transitional areas between forests and thickets (for cover) and prairie and savanna (open space). The majority of large deer species inhabit temperate mixed deciduous forest, mountain mixed coniferous forest, tropical seasonal/dry forest, and savanna habitats around the world. Clearing open areas within forests to some extent may actually benefit deer populations by exposing the understory and allowing the types of grasses, weeds, and herbs to grow that deer like to eat. Access to adjacent croplands may also benefit deer. Adequate forest or brush cover must still be provided for populations to grow and thrive.

Deer are widely distributed, with indigenous representatives in all continents except Antarctica and Australia, though Africa has only one native deer, the Barbary stag, a subspecies of red deer that is confined to the Atlas Mountains in the northwest of the continent. Another extinct species of deer, Megaceroides algericus, was present in North Africa until 6000 years ago. Fallow deer have been introduced to South Africa. Small species of brocket deer and pudús of Central and South America, and muntjacs of Asia generally occupy dense forests and are less often seen in open spaces, with the possible exception of the Indian muntjac. There are also several species of deer that are highly specialized and live almost exclusively in mountains, grasslands, swamps, and "wet" savannas, or riparian corridors surrounded by deserts. Some deer have a circumpolar distribution in both North America and Eurasia. Examples include the caribou that live in Arctic tundra and taiga (boreal forests) and moose that inhabit taiga and adjacent areas. Huemul deer (taruca and Chilean huemul) of South America's Andes fill the ecological niches of the ibex and wild goat, with the fawns behaving more like goat kids.

The highest concentration of large deer species in temperate North America lies in the Canadian Rocky Mountain and Columbia Mountain regions between Alberta and British Columbia where all five North American deer species (white-tailed deer, mule deer, caribou, elk, and moose) can be found. This region has several clusters of national parks including Mount Revelstoke National Park, Glacier National Park (Canada), Yoho National Park, and Kootenay National Park on the British Columbia side, and Banff National Park, Jasper National Park, and Glacier National Park (U.S.) on the Alberta and Montana sides. Mountain slope habitats vary from moist coniferous/mixed forested habitats to dry subalpine/pine forests with alpine meadows higher up. The foothills and river valleys between the mountain ranges provide a mosaic of cropland and deciduous parklands. The rare woodland caribou have the most restricted range living at higher altitudes in the subalpine meadows and alpine tundra areas of some of the mountain ranges. Elk and mule deer both migrate between the alpine meadows and lower coniferous forests and tend to be most common in this region. Elk also inhabit river valley bottomlands, which they share with White-tailed deer. The White-tailed deer have recently expanded their range within the foothills and river valley bottoms of the Canadian Rockies owing to conversion of land to cropland and the clearing of coniferous forests allowing more deciduous vegetation to grow up the mountain slopes. They also live in the aspen parklands north of Calgary and Edmonton, where they share habitat with the moose. The adjacent Great Plains grassland habitats are left to herds of elk, American bison, and pronghorn.


Reindeer herds standing on snow to avoid flies
The Eurasian Continent (including the Indian Subcontinent) boasts the most species of deer in the world, with most species being found in Asia. Europe, in comparison, has lower diversity in plant and animal species. Many national parks and protected reserves in Europe have populations of red deer, roe deer, and fallow deer. These species have long been associated with the continent of Europe, but also inhabit Asia Minor, the Caucasus Mountains, and Northwestern Iran. "European" fallow deer historically lived over much of Europe during the Ice Ages, but afterwards became restricted primarily to the Anatolian Peninsula, in present-day Turkey.

Present-day fallow deer populations in Europe are a result of historic man-made introductions of this species, first to the Mediterranean regions of Europe, then eventually to the rest of Europe. They were initially park animals that later escaped and reestablished themselves in the wild. Historically, Europe's deer species shared their deciduous forest habitat with other herbivores, such as the extinct tarpan (forest horse), extinct aurochs (forest ox), and the endangered wisent (European bison). Good places to see deer in Europe include the Scottish Highlands, the Austrian Alps, the wetlands between Austria, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, and some National Parks, including Doñana National Park in Spain, the Veluwe in the Netherlands, the Ardennes in Belgium, and Białowieża National Park in Poland. Spain, Eastern Europe, and the Caucasus Mountains have forest areas that are not only home to sizable deer populations but also other animals that were once abundant such as the wisent, Eurasian lynx, Iberian lynx, wolves, and brown bears.


Some sika deer (Cervus nippon) and Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata) along a waterside
The highest concentration of large deer species in temperate Asia occurs in the mixed deciduous forests, mountain coniferous forests, and taiga bordering North Korea, Manchuria (Northeastern China), and the Ussuri Region (Russia). These are among some of the richest deciduous and coniferous forests in the world where one can find Siberian roe deer, sika deer, elk, and moose. Asian caribou occupy the northern fringes of this region along the Sino-Russian border.

Deer such as the sika deer, Thorold's deer, Central Asian red deer, and elk have historically been farmed for their antlers by Han Chinese, Turkic peoples, Tungusic peoples, Mongolians, and Koreans. Like the Sami people of Finland and Scandinavia, the Tungusic peoples, Mongolians, and Turkic peoples of Southern Siberia, Northern Mongolia, and the Ussuri Region have also taken to raising semi-domesticated herds of Asian caribou.

The highest concentration of large deer species in the tropics occurs in Southern Asia in India's Indo-Gangetic Plain Region and Nepal's Terai Region. These fertile plains consist of tropical seasonal moist deciduous, dry deciduous forests, and both dry and wet savannas that are home to chital, hog deer, barasingha, Indian sambar, and Indian muntjac. Grazing species such as the endangered barasingha and very common chital are gregarious and live in large herds. Indian sambar can be gregarious but are usually solitary or live in smaller herds. Hog deer are solitary and have lower densities than Indian muntjac. Deer can be seen in several national parks in India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka of which Kanha National Park, Dudhwa National Park, and Chitwan National Park are most famous. Sri Lanka's Wilpattu National Park and Yala National Park have large herds of Indian sambar and chital. The Indian sambar are more gregarious in Sri Lanka than other parts of their range and tend to form larger herds than elsewhere.


A couple Sambar does and a Chital buck roaming the Sigur Plateau in southern India
The Chao Praya River Valley of Thailand was once primarily tropical seasonal moist deciduous forest and wet savanna that hosted populations of hog deer, the now-extinct Schomburgk's deer, Eld's deer, Indian sambar, and Indian muntjac. Both the hog deer and Eld's deer are rare, whereas Indian sambar and Indian muntjac thrive in protected national parks, such as Khao Yai. Many of these South Asian and Southeast Asian deer species also share their habitat with other herbivores, such as Asian elephants, the various Asian rhinoceros species, various antelope species (such as nilgai, four-horned antelope, blackbuck, and Indian gazelle in India), and wild oxen (such as wild Asian water buffalo, gaur, banteng, and kouprey). One way that different herbivores can survive together in a given area is for each species to have different food preferences, although there may be some overlap.

As a result of acclimatisation society releases in the 19th century, Australia has six introduced species of deer that have established sustainable wild populations. They are fallow deer, red deer, sambar, hog deer, rusa, and chital. Red deer were introduced into New Zealand in 1851 from English and Scottish stock. Many have been domesticated in deer farms since the late 1960s and are common farm animals there now. Seven other species of deer were introduced into New Zealand but none are as widespread as red deer.[8]

Description

Deer tails:
White-tailed deer
Mule deer
Black-tailed deer
Elk
Red deer
Deer constitute the second most diverse family of artiodactyla after bovids.[9] Though of a similar build, deer are strongly distinguished from antelopes by their antlers, which are temporary and regularly regrown unlike the permanent horns of bovids.[10] Characteristics typical of deer include long, powerful legs, a diminutive tail and long ears.[11] Deer exhibit a broad variation in physical proportions. The largest extant deer is the moose, which is nearly 2.6 metres (8 ft 6 in) tall and weighs up to 800 kilograms (1,800 lb).[12][13] The elk stands 1.4–2 metres (4 ft 7 in – 6 ft 7 in) at the shoulder and weighs 240–450 kilograms (530–990 lb).[14] The northern pudu is the smallest deer in the world; it reaches merely 32–35 centimetres (12+1⁄2–14 in) at the shoulder and weighs 3.3–6 kilograms (7+1⁄4–13+1⁄4 lb). The southern pudu is only slightly taller and heavier.[15] Sexual dimorphism is quite pronounced – in most species males tend to be larger than females,[16] and, except for the reindeer, only males have antlers.[17]

Coat colour generally varies between red and brown,[18] though it can be as dark as chocolate brown in the tufted deer[19] or have a grayish tinge as in elk.[14] Different species of brocket deer vary from gray to reddish brown in coat colour.[20] Several species such as the chital,[21] the fallow deer[22] and the sika deer[23] feature white spots on a brown coat. Coat of reindeer shows notable geographical variation.[24] Deer undergo two moults in a year;[18][25] for instance, in red deer the red, thin-haired summer coat is gradually replaced by the dense, greyish brown winter coat in autumn, which in turn gives way to the summer coat in the following spring.[26] Moulting is affected by the photoperiod.[27]

Deer are also excellent jumpers and swimmers. Deer are ruminants, or cud-chewers, and have a four-chambered stomach. Some deer, such as those on the island of Rùm,[28] do consume meat when it is available.[29]

Nearly all deer have a facial gland in front of each eye. The gland contains a strongly scented pheromone, used to mark its home range. Bucks of a wide range of species open these glands wide when angry or excited. All deer have a liver without a gallbladder. Deer also have a tapetum lucidum, which gives them sufficiently good night vision.

Antlers
Main article: Antler

White-tailed deer
All male deer have antlers, with the exception of the water deer, in which males have long tusk-like canines that reach below the lower jaw.[30] Females generally lack antlers, though female reindeer bear antlers smaller and less branched than those of the males.[31] Occasionally females in other species may develop antlers, especially in telemetacarpal deer such as European roe deer, red deer, white-tailed deer and mule deer and less often in plesiometacarpal deer. A study of antlered female white-tailed deer noted that antlers tend to be small and malformed, and are shed frequently around the time of parturition.[32]


Antler phylogenetics
The fallow deer and the various subspecies of the reindeer have the largest as well as the heaviest antlers, both in absolute terms as well as in proportion to body mass (an average of eight grams per kilogram of body mass);[31][33] the tufted deer, on the other hand, has the smallest antlers of all deer, while the pudú has the lightest antlers with respect to body mass (0.6 g per kilogram of body mass).[31] The structure of antlers show considerable variation; while fallow deer and elk antlers are palmate (with a broad central portion), white-tailed deer antlers include a series of tines sprouting upward from a forward-curving main beam, and those of the pudú are mere spikes.[15] Antler development begins from the pedicel, a bony structure that appears on the top of the skull by the time the animal is a year old. The pedicel gives rise to a spiky antler the following year, that is replaced by a branched antler in the third year. This process of losing a set of antlers to develop a larger and more branched set continues for the rest of the life.[31] The antlers emerge as soft tissues (known as velvet antlers) and progressively harden into bony structures (known as hard antlers), following mineralisation and blockage of blood vessels in the tissue, from the tip to the base.[34]


Two Sambar deer fighting, Silvassa, India
Antlers might be one of the most exaggerated male secondary sexual characteristics,[35] and are intended primarily for reproductive success through sexual selection and for combat. The tines (forks) on the antlers create grooves that allow another male's antlers to lock into place. This allows the males to wrestle without risking injury to the face.[36] Antlers are correlated to an individual's position in the social hierarchy and its behaviour. For instance, the heavier the antlers, the higher the individual's status in the social hierarchy, and the greater the delay in shedding the antlers;[31] males with larger antlers tend to be more aggressive and dominant over others.[37] Antlers can be an honest signal of genetic quality; males with larger antlers relative to body size tend to have increased resistance to pathogens[38] and higher reproductive capacity.[39]

In elk in Yellowstone National Park, antlers also provide protection against predation by wolves.[40]

Homology of tines, that is, the branching structure of antlers among species, have been discussed before the 1900s.[41][42][43] Recently, a new method to describe the branching structure of antlers and determining homology of tines was developed.[44]

Teeth

An example of a deer's mandible and teeth
Most deer bear 32 teeth; the corresponding dental formula is: 
0.0.3.3
3.1.3.3
. The elk and the reindeer may be exceptions, as they may retain their upper canines and thus have 34 teeth (dental formula: 
0.1.3.3
3.1.3.3
).[45] The Chinese water deer, tufted deer, and muntjac have enlarged upper canine teeth forming sharp tusks, while other species often lack upper canines altogether. The cheek teeth of deer have crescent ridges of enamel, which enable them to grind a wide variety of vegetation.[46] The teeth of deer are adapted to feeding on vegetation, and like other ruminants, they lack upper incisors, instead having a tough pad at the front of their upper jaw.

Biology

A Roe deer browsing tree leaves in Brastad, Sweden
Diet
Deer are browsers, and feed primarily on foliage of grasses, sedges, forbs, shrubs and trees, secondarily on lichens in northern latitudes during winter.[47] They have small, unspecialized stomachs by ruminant standards, and high nutrition requirements. Rather than eating and digesting vast quantities of low-grade fibrous food as, for example, sheep and cattle do, deer select easily digestible shoots, young leaves, fresh grasses, soft twigs, fruit, fungi, and lichens. The low-fibered food, after minimal fermentation and shredding, passes rapidly through the alimentary canal. The deer require a large amount of minerals such as calcium and phosphate in order to support antler growth, and this further necessitates a nutrient-rich diet. There are some reports of deer engaging in carnivorous activity, such as eating dead alewives along lakeshores[48] or depredating the nests of northern bobwhites.[49]

Reproduction
Main article: Rut (mammalian reproduction) § Cervidae

Female elk nursing young
Nearly all cervids are so-called uniparental species: the young, known in most species as fawns, are only cared for by the mother, most often called a doe. A doe generally has one or two fawns at a time (triplets, while not unknown, are uncommon). Mating season typically begins in later August and lasts until December. Some species mate until early March. The gestation period is anywhere up to ten months for the European roe deer. Most fawns are born with their fur covered with white spots, though in many species they lose these spots by the end of their first winter. In the first twenty minutes of a fawn's life, the fawn begins to take its first steps. Its mother licks it clean until it is almost free of scent, so predators will not find it. Its mother leaves often to graze, and the fawn does not like to be left behind. Sometimes its mother must gently push it down with her foot.[50][better source needed] The fawn stays hidden in the grass for one week until it is strong enough to walk with its mother. The fawn and its mother stay together for about one year. A male usually leaves and never sees his mother again, but females sometimes come back with their own fawns and form small herds.

Disease
In some areas of the UK, deer (especially fallow deer due to their gregarious behaviour) have been implicated as a possible reservoir for transmission of bovine tuberculosis,[51][52] a disease which in the UK in 2005 cost £90 million in attempts to eradicate.[53] In New Zealand, deer are thought to be important as vectors picking up M. bovis in areas where brushtail possums Trichosurus vulpecula are infected, and transferring it to previously uninfected possums when their carcasses are scavenged elsewhere.[54] The white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus has been confirmed as the sole maintenance host in the Michigan outbreak of bovine tuberculosis which remains a significant barrier to the US nationwide eradication of the disease in livestock.[55] Moose and deer can carry rabies.[56]

Docile moose may suffer from brain worm, a helminth which drills holes through the brain in its search for a suitable place to lay its eggs. A government biologist states that "They move around looking for the right spot and never really find it." Deer appear to be immune to this parasite; it passes through the digestive system and is excreted in the feces. The parasite is not screened by the moose intestine, and passes into the brain where damage is done that is externally apparent, both in behaviour and in gait.[56]

Deer, elk and moose in North America may suffer from chronic wasting disease, which was identified at a Colorado laboratory in the 1960s and is believed to be a prion disease. Out of an abundance of caution hunters are advised to avoid contact with specified risk material (SRM) such as the brain, spinal column or lymph nodes. Deboning the meat when butchering and sanitizing the knives and other tools used to butcher are amongst other government recommendations.[57]

Evolution
Deer are believed to have evolved from antlerless, tusked ancestors that resembled modern duikers and diminutive deer in the early Eocene, and gradually developed into the first antlered cervoids (the superfamily of cervids and related extinct families) in the Miocene. Eventually, with the development of antlers, the tusks as well as the upper incisors disappeared. Thus, evolution of deer took nearly 30 million years. Biologist Valerius Geist suggests evolution to have occurred in stages. There are not many prominent fossils to trace this evolution, but only fragments of skeletons and antlers that might be easily confused with false antlers of non-cervid species.[15][58]

Eocene
The ruminants, ancestors of the Cervidae, are believed to have evolved from Diacodexis, the earliest known artiodactyl (even-toed ungulate), 50–55 Mya in the Eocene.[59] Diacodexis, nearly the size of a rabbit, featured the talus bone characteristic of all modern even-toed ungulates. This ancestor and its relatives occurred throughout North America and Eurasia, but were on the decline by at least 46 Mya.[59][60] Analysis of a nearly complete skeleton of Diacodexis discovered in 1982 gave rise to speculation that this ancestor could be closer to the non-ruminants than the ruminants.[61] Andromeryx is another prominent prehistoric ruminant, but appears to be closer to the tragulids.[62]

Oligocene

Leptomeryx
The formation of the Himalayas and the Alps brought about significant geographic changes. This was the chief reason behind the extensive diversification of deer-like forms and the emergence of cervids from the Oligocene to the early Pliocene.[63] The latter half of the Oligocene (28–34 Mya) saw the appearance of the European Eumeryx and the North American Leptomeryx. The latter resembled modern-day bovids and cervids in dental morphology (for instance, it had brachyodont molars), while the former was more advanced.[64] Other deer-like forms included the North American Blastomeryx and the European Dremotherium; these sabre-toothed animals are believed to have been the direct ancestors of all modern antlered deer, though they themselves lacked antlers.[65] Another contemporaneous form was the four-horned protoceratid Protoceras, that was replaced by Syndyoceras in the Miocene; these animals were unique in having a horn on the nose.[58] Late Eocene fossils dated approximately 35 million years ago, which were found in North America, show that Syndyoceras had bony skull outgrowths that resembled non-deciduous antlers.[66]

Miocene
Fossil evidence suggests that the earliest members of the superfamily Cervoidea appeared in Eurasia in the Miocene. Dicrocerus, Euprox and Heteroprox were probably the first antlered cervids.[67] Dicrocerus featured single-forked antlers that were shed regularly.[68] Stephanocemas had more developed and diffuse ("crowned") antlers.[69] Procervulus (Palaeomerycidae) also had antlers that were not shed.[70] Contemporary forms such as the merycodontines eventually gave rise to the modern pronghorn.[71]

The Cervinae emerged as the first group of extant cervids around 7–9 Mya, during the late Miocene in central Asia. The tribe Muntiacini made its appearance as † Muntiacus leilaoensis around 7–8 Mya;[72] The early muntjacs varied in size–as small as hares or as large as fallow deer. They had tusks for fighting and antlers for defence.[15] Capreolinae followed soon after; Alceini appeared 6.4–8.4 Mya.[73] Around this period, the Tethys Ocean disappeared to give way to vast stretches of grassland; these provided the deer with abundant protein-rich vegetation that led to the development of ornamental antlers and allowed populations to flourish and colonise areas.[15][63] As antlers had become pronounced, the canines were either lost or became poorly represented (as in elk), probably because diet was no longer browse-dominated and antlers were better display organs. In muntjac and tufted deer, the antlers as well as the canines are small. The tragulids have long canines to this day.[60]

Pliocene

Cervocerus novorossiae
With the onset of the Pliocene, the global climate became cooler. A fall in the sea-level led to massive glaciation; consequently, grasslands abounded in nutritious forage. Thus a new spurt in deer populations ensued.[15][63] The oldest member of Cervini, † Cervocerus novorossiae, appeared around the transition from Miocene to Pliocene (4.2–6 Mya) in Eurasia;[74] cervine fossils from early Pliocene to as late as the Pleistocene have been excavated in China[75] and the Himalayas.[76] While Cervus and Dama appeared nearly 3 Mya, Axis emerged during the late Pliocene–Pleistocene. The tribes Capreolini and Rangiferini appeared around 4–7 Mya.[73]

Around 5 Mya, the rangiferina † Bretzia and † Eocoileus were the first cervids to reach North America.[73] This implies the Bering Strait could be crossed during the late Miocene–Pliocene; this appears highly probable as the camelids migrated into Asia from North America around the same time.[77] Deer invaded South America in the late Pliocene (2.5–3 Mya) as part of the Great American Interchange, thanks to the recently formed Isthmus of Panama, and emerged successful due to the small number of competing ruminants in the continent.[78]

Pleistocene
Large deer with impressive antlers evolved during the early Pleistocene, probably as a result of abundant resources to drive evolution.[15] The early Pleistocene cervid † Eucladoceros was comparable in size to the modern elk.[79] † Megaloceros (Pliocene–Pleistocene) featured the Irish elk (M. giganteus), one of the largest known cervids. The Irish elk reached 2 metres (6+1⁄2 ft) at the shoulder and had heavy antlers that spanned 3.6 metres (11 ft 10 in) from tip to tip.[80] These large animals were traditionally thought to have faced extinction due to conflict between sexual selection for large antlers and body and natural selection for a smaller form,[81] but a combination of anthropogenic and climatic pressures is now thought to be the most likely culprit.[82] Meanwhile, the moose and reindeer radiated into North America from Siberia.[83]

Taxonomy and classification
Further information: List of cervids

Cervid skull
Deer constitute the artiodactyl family Cervidae. This family was first described by German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss in Handbuch der Zoologie (1820). Three subfamilies were recognised: Capreolinae (first described by the English zoologist Joshua Brookes in 1828), Cervinae (described by Goldfuss) and Hydropotinae (first described by French zoologist Édouard Louis Trouessart in 1898).[9][84]

Other attempts at the classification of deer have been based on morphological and genetic differences.[58] The Anglo-Irish naturalist Victor Brooke suggested in 1878 that deer could be bifurcated into two classes on the according to the features of the second and fifth metacarpal bones of their forelimbs: Plesiometacarpalia (most Old World deer) and Telemetacarpalia (most New World deer). He treated the musk deer as a cervid, placing it under Telemetacarpalia. While the telemetacarpal deer showed only those elements located far from the joint, the plesiometacarpal deer retained the elements closer to the joint as well.[85] Differentiation on the basis of diploid number of chromosomes in the late 20th century has been flawed by several inconsistencies.[58]

In 1987, the zoologists Colin Groves and Peter Grubb identified three subfamilies: Cervinae, Hydropotinae and Odocoileinae; they noted that the hydropotines lack antlers, and the other two subfamilies differ in their skeletal morphology.[86] They reverted from this classification in 2000.[87]

Molecular phylogenetic analyses since the latter half of the 2000s all show that hydropotes is a sister taxon of Capreolus, and “Hydropotinae” became outdated subfamily.[88][89][90][91][92]

External relationships
Until 2003, it was understood that the family Moschidae (musk deer) was sister to Cervidae. Then a phylogenetic study by Alexandre Hassanin (of National Museum of Natural History, France) and colleagues, based on mitochondrial and nuclear analyses, revealed that Moschidae and Bovidae form a clade sister to Cervidae. According to the study, Cervidae diverged from the Bovidae-Moschidae clade 27 to 28 million years ago.[93] The following cladogram is based on the 2003 study.[93]

Ruminantia	
Tragulina	
Tragulidae 

Pecora	
Antilocapridae 

Giraffidae 

Cervidae 

Bovidae 

Moschidae 

Internal relationships
A 2006 phylogenetic study of the internal relationships in Cervidae by Clément Gilbert and colleagues divided the family into two major clades: Capreolinae (telemetacarpal or New World deer) and Cervinae (plesiometacarpal or Old World deer). Studies in the late 20th century suggested a similar bifurcation in the family. This as well as previous studies support monophyly in Cervinae, while Capreolinae appears paraphyletic. The 2006 study identified two lineages in Cervinae, Cervini (comprising the genera Axis, Cervus, Dama and Rucervus) and Muntiacini (Muntiacus and Elaphodus). Capreolinae featured three lineages, Alceini (Alces species), Capreolini (Capreolus and the subfamily Hydropotinae) and Rangiferini (Blastocerus, Hippocamelus, Mazama, Odocoileus, Pudu and Rangifer species). The following cladogram is based on the 2006 study.[73]

Cervidae	
Cervinae (Old World deer)	
Muntiacini	
Reeves's muntjac

Tufted deer 

Cervini	
Common fallow deer 

Persian fallow deer 

Rusa

Sambar 

Red deer 

Thorold's deer 

Sika deer 

Elk (Wapiti) 

Eld's deer 

Père David's deer 

Barasingha

Indian hog deer

Chital

Capreolinae (New World deer)	
Rangiferini	
Reindeer (Caribou) 

American red brocket 

White-tailed deer 

Mule deer 

Marsh deer

Gray brocket

Southern pudu 

Taruca 

Capreolini	
Roe deer 

Water deer 

Alceini	
Moose or Eurasian elk 

Human interaction
Further information: Deer in mythology

Upper Palaeolithic cave painting of a Megaloceros giant deer at Lascaux, 17,300 years old
Prehistoric
Deer were an important source of food for early hominids. In China, Homo erectus fed upon the sika deer, while the red deer was hunted in Germany. In the Upper Palaeolithic, the reindeer was the staple food for Cro-Magnon people,[94] while the cave paintings at Lascaux in southwestern France include some 90 images of stags.[95] In China, deer continued to be a main source of food for millennia even after people began farming, and it is possible that sika and other deer benefited from the frequently abandoned field sites.[96][97]

Historic

Ancient Greek gilt-silver rhyton, 4th century BC
Deer had a central role in the ancient art, culture and mythology of various peoples including the Hittites, the ancient Egyptians, the Celts, the ancient Greeks, and certain East Asian cultures. For instance, the Stag Hunt Mosaic of ancient Pella, under the Kingdom of Macedonia (4th century BC), possibly depicts Alexander the Great hunting a deer with Hephaestion.[98] In Japanese Shintoism, the sika deer is believed to be a messenger to the gods. In China, deer are associated with great medicinal significance; deer penis is thought by some in China to have aphrodisiac properties.[99] Spotted deer are believed in China to accompany the god of longevity. Deer was the principal sacrificial animal for the Huichal Indians of Mexico. In medieval Europe, deer appeared in hunting scenes and coats-of-arms. Deer are depicted in many materials by various pre-Hispanic civilizations in the Andes.[94][100]

The common male given name Oscar is taken from the Irish Language, where it is derived from two elements: the first, os, means "deer"; the second element, cara, means "friend". The name is borne by a famous hero of Irish mythology—Oscar, grandson of Fionn Mac Cumhail. The name was popularised in the 18th century by James Macpherson, creator of 'Ossianic poetry'.

Literary

In the Indian epic Ramayana, Rama kills the illusional golden deer
Deer have been an integral part of fables and other literary works since the inception of writing. Stags were used as symbols in the latter Sumerian writings. For instance, the boat of Sumerian god Enki is named the Stag of Azbu. There are several mentions of the animal in the Rigveda as well as the Bible. In the Indian epic Ramayana, Sita is lured by a golden deer which Rama tries to catch. In the absence of both Rama and Lakshman, Ravana kidnaps Sita. Many of the allegorical Aesop's fables, such as "The Stag at the Pool", "The One-Eyed Doe" and "The Stag and a Lion", personify deer to give moral lessons. For instance, "The Sick Stag" gives the message that uncaring friends can do more harm than good.[94] The Yaqui deer song accompanies the deer dance which is performed by a pascola [from the Spanish 'pascua', Easter] dancer (also known as a deer dancer). Pascolas would perform at religious and social functions many times of the year, especially during Lent and Easter.[94][101]

In one of Rudolf Erich Raspe's 1785 stories of Baron Munchausen's Narrative of his Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia, the baron encounters a stag while eating cherries and, without ammunition, fires the cherry-pits at the stag with his musket, but it escapes. The next year, the baron encounters a stag with a cherry tree growing from its head; presumably this is the animal he had shot at the previous year. In Christmas lore (such as in the narrative poem "A Visit from St. Nicholas"), reindeer are often depicted pulling the sleigh of Santa Claus.[102] Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings's Pulitzer Prize-winning 1938 novel The Yearling was about a boy's relationship with a baby deer. The fiction book Fire Bringer is about a young fawn who goes on a quest to save the Herla, the deer kind.[103] In the 1942 Walt Disney Pictures film, Bambi is a white-tailed deer, while in Felix Salten's original 1923 book Bambi, a Life in the Woods, he is a roe deer. In C. S. Lewis's 1950 fantasy novel The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe the adult Pevensies, now kings and queens of Narnia, chase the White Stag on a hunt, as the Stag is said to grant its captor a wish. The hunt is key in returning the Pevensies to their home in England. In the 1979 book The Animals of Farthing Wood, The Great White Stag is the leader of all the animals.

Heraldic

Arms of Raon-aux-Bois, France

Arms of Åland
Deer of various types appear frequently in European heraldry. In the British armory, the term "stag" is typically used to refer to antlered male red deer, while "buck" indicates an antlered male fallow deer. Stags and bucks appear in a number of attitudes, referred to as "lodged" when the deer is lying down, "trippant" when it has one leg raised, "courant" when it is running, "springing" when in the act of leaping, "statant" when it is standing with all hooves on the ground and looking ahead, and "at gaze" when otherwise statant but looking at the viewer. Stags' heads are also frequently used; these are typically portrayed without an attached neck and as facing the viewer, in which case they are termed "caboshed".[104]

Examples of deer in coats of arms can be found in the arms of Hertfordshire, England, and its county town of Hertford; both are examples of canting arms. A deer appears on the arms of the Israeli Postal Authority. Coats of arms featuring deer include those of Baden-Württemberg, Dotternhausen, Thierachern, Friolzheim, Bauen, Albstadt, and Dassel in Germany; of the Earls Bathurst in England;[105] of Balakhna,[106] Gusev,[107] Nizhny Novgorod,[108] Odintsovo,[109] Slavsk[110] and Yamalo-Nenets[111] in Russia; of Berezhany, Sambir in Ukraine; of Åland,[112] Finland; of Gjemnes,[113] Hitra,[114] Hjartdal[115] and Rendalen[116] in Norway; of Jelenia Góra,[117] Poland; of Umeå,[118] Sweden; of Queensland,[119] Australia; of Cervera,[120] Catalonia; of Selonia[121] and Semigallia[122] in Latvia; and of Chile.[123]

Other types of deer used in heraldry include the hind, portrayed much like the stag or buck but without antlers, as well as the reindeer and winged stags. Winged stags are used as supporters in the arms of the de Carteret family. The sea-stag, having the antlers, head, forelegs and upper body of a stag and the tail of a mermaid, is often found in German heraldry.[104]

Economic

Bronze deer, Warring States period
Deer have long had economic significance to humans. Deer meat, known as venison, is highly nutritious.[124][125] It can be obtained responsibly through the process of hunting deer in their natural habitat. Domestically, it is produced in small amounts compared to beef, but still represents a significant trade. Deer hunting is a popular activity in the U.S. that can provide the hunter's family with high quality meat and generates revenue for states and the federal government from the sales of licenses, permits and tags. The 2006 survey by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that license sales generate approximately $700 million annually. This revenue generally goes to support conservation efforts in the states where the licenses are purchased. Overall, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that big game hunting for deer and elk generates approximately $11.8 billion annually in hunting-related travel, equipment and related expenditures.[126] Conservation laws prevent the sale of unlicensed wild game meat, although it may be donated.


Nicholas Mavrogenes, Phanariote Prince of Wallachia, riding through Bucharest in a stag−drawn carriage. Late 1780s
Deer have often been bred in captivity as ornaments for parks, but only in the case of reindeer has thorough domestication succeeded.[127] By 2012, some 25,000 tons of red deer were raised on farms in North America. The Sami of Scandinavia and the Kola Peninsula of Russia and other nomadic peoples of northern Asia use reindeer for food, clothing, and transport. Others are bred for hunting are selected based on the size of the antlers.[128] The major deer-producing countries are New Zealand, the market leader, with Ireland, Great Britain and Germany. The trade earns over $100 million annually for these countries.[129]

Automobile collisions with deer can impose a significant cost on the economy. In the U.S., about 1.5 million deer-vehicle collisions occur each year, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Those accidents cause about 150 human deaths and $1.1 billion in property damage annually.[130] In Scotland, several roads including the A82, the A87 and the A835 have had significant enough problems with deer vehicle collisions (DVCs) that sets of vehicle activated automatic warning signs have been installed along these roads.[131]


Leather side of a roe deer hide
The skins make a peculiarly strong, soft leather, known as buckskin. There is nothing special about skins with the fur still on since the hair is brittle and soon falls off. The hooves and antlers are used for ornamental purposes, especially the antlers of the roe deer, which are utilized for making umbrella handles, and for similar purposes; elk antlers is often employed in making knife handles. Among the Inuit, the traditional ulu women's knife was made with an antler or ivory handle.[132] In China, a traditional chinese medicine is made from stag antler, and the antlers of certain species are eaten when "in the velvet".[127] Antlers can also be boiled down to release the protein gelatin, which is used as a topical treatment for skin irritation and is also used in cooking.[133]

Since the early 20th century, deer have become commonly thought of as pests in New Zealand due to a lack of predators on the island causing population numbers to increase and begin encroaching on more populated areas. They compete with livestock for resources, as well as cause excess erosion and wreak havoc on wild plant species and agriculture alike. They can also have an effect on the conservation efforts of other plant and animal species, as they can critically offset the balance within an environment by drastically depleting diversity within forests.[134]

See also
icon	Animals portal
icon	Mammals portal
Australian Deer Association
Deer forest
Deer management
Largest cervids
Reindeer hunting in Greenland
References
 'deer' singular and plural among examples (swine OE swin, deer OE deor, sheep OE sceap, horse OE hors, year OE gear, pound OE pana) -Jespersen, Part II SYNTAX (First Volume), Ch.III The Unchanged Plural (p. 49) arrow.latrobe.edu.au accessed 14 November 2020
 Iltanen, Jussi: Suomen kuntavaakunat (2013), Karttakeskus, ISBN 951-593-915-1
 "deer". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed.). Houghton Mifflin Company. 2000. Archived from the original on 25 March 2004.
 Harper, Douglas. "Deer". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 7 June 2012.
 OED, s.v. hart and hind
 Brander, Michael (1986). Deer Stalking in Britain. London: Sportsman's Press. p. 159. ISBN 0-948253-05-3.
 Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary, published 1913 by G. & C. Merriam Co.
 McLintock, A. H., ed. (1966). "Deer". Te Ara: An Encyclopaedia of New Zealand.
 Groves, C. (2007). "Family Cervidae". In Prothero, D. R.; Foss, S. E. (eds.). The Evolution of Artiodactyls (Illustrated ed.). Baltimore, US: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 249–56. ISBN 978-0-801-88735-2.
 Kingdon, J. (2015). The Kingdon Field Guide to African Mammals (2nd ed.). London, UK: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 499. ISBN 978-1-4729-2531-2.
 Jameson, E. W.; Peeters, H. J. Jr. (2004). Mammals of California (Revised ed.). Berkeley, US: University of California Press. p. 241. ISBN 978-0-520-23582-3.
 Long, C. A. (2008). The Wild Mammals of Wisconsin. Sofia, Bulgaria: Pensoft. p. 439. ISBN 9789546423139.
 Prothero, D. R.; Schoch, R. M. (2002). Horns, Tusks, and Flippers: The Evolution of Hoofed Mammals. Baltimore, US: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 61–84. ISBN 978-0-8018-7135-1.
 Kurta, A. (1995). Mammals of the Great Lakes Region (1st ed.). Michigan, US: University of Michigan Press. pp. 260–1. ISBN 978-0-472-06497-7.
 Geist, V. (1998). Deer of the World: Their Evolution, Behaviour and Ecology (1st ed.). Mechanicsburg, US: Stackpole Books. pp. 1–54. ISBN 978-0-8117-0496-0.
 Armstrong, D. M.; Fitzgerald, J. P.; Meaney, C. A. (2011). Mammals of Colorado (2nd ed.). Colorado, US: University Press of Colorado. p. 445. ISBN 978-1-60732-048-7.
 Kingdon, J.; Happold, D.; Butynski, T.; Hoffmann, M.; Happold, M.; Kalina, J. (2013). Mammals of Africa. Vol. VI. London, UK: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 116. ISBN 978-1-4081-8996-2.
 Feldhamer, G. A.; McShea, W. J. (2012). Deer: The Animal Answer Guide. Baltimore, US: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 1–142. ISBN 978-1-4214-0387-8.
 Francis, C. M. (2008). A Field Guide to the Mammals of South-East Asia. London, UK: New Holland. p. 130. ISBN 978-1-84537-735-9.
 Trolle, M.; Emmons, L. H. (2004). "A record of a dwarf brocket from Lowland Madre De Dios, Peru" (PDF). Deer Specialist Group News (19): 2–5.
 Schmidly, D. J. (2004). The Mammals of Texas (Revised ed.). Austin, Texas (US): University of Texas Press. pp. 263–4. ISBN 978-1-4773-0886-8.
 Hames, D. S.; Koshowski, Denise (1999). Hoofed Mammals of British Columbia. Vancouver, Canada: UBC Press. p. 113. ISBN 978-0-7748-0728-9.
 Booy, O.; Wade, M.; Roy, H. (2015). Field Guide to Invasive Plants and Animals in Britain. London, UK: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 170. ISBN 978-1-4729-1153-7.
 Bowers, N.; Bowers, R.; Kaufmann, K. (2004). Mammals of North America. New York, US: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 158–9. ISBN 978-0-618-15313-8.
 Hooey, T. (2004). Strategic Whitetail Hunting. Krause Publications. p. 39. ISBN 978-1-4402-2702-8.
 Ryder, M. L.; Kay, R. N. B. (1973). "Structure of and seasonal change in the coat of Red deer (Cervus elaphus)". Journal of Zoology. 170 (1): 69–77. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.1973.tb05044.x. ISSN 0952-8369.
 Lincoln, G. A.; Guinness, F. E. (1972). "Effect of altered photoperiod on delayed implantation and moulting in roe deer" (PDF). Reproduction. 31 (3): 455–7. doi:10.1530/jrf.0.0310455. PMID 4648129. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 Owen, James (25 August 2003). "Scottish Deer Are Culprits in Bird Killings". National Geographic News. Archived from the original on 29 August 2003. Retrieved 16 June 2009.
 Dale, Michael (1988). "Carnivorous Deer". Omni Magazine: 31.
 Burton, M.; Burton, R. (2002). International Wildlife Encyclopedia (3rd ed.). New York, US: Marshall Cavendish. pp. 446–7. ISBN 978-0-7614-7270-4.
 Hall, B. K. (2005). Bones and Cartilage: Developmental and Evolutionary Skeletal Biology. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Academic Press. pp. 103–15. ISBN 978-0-08-045415-3.
 Wislocki, G. B. (1954). "Antlers in female deer, with a report of three cases in Odocoileus". Journal of Mammalogy. 35 (4): 486–95. doi:10.2307/1375571. JSTOR 1375571.
 Smith, T. (2013). The Real Rudolph: A Natural History of the Reindeer. New York, US: The History Press. ISBN 978-0-7524-9592-7.
 Fletcher, T. J. (1986). "Reproduction: seasonality". In Alexander, T. L.; Buxton, D. (eds.). Management and Diseases of Deer: A Handbook for the Veterinary Surgeon (2nd ed.). London, UK: Veterinary Deer Society. pp. 17–8. ISBN 978-0-9510826-0-7.
 Malo, A. F.; Roldan, E. R. S.; Garde, J.; Soler, A. J.; Gomendio, M. (2005). "Antlers honestly advertise sperm production and quality". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 272 (1559): 149–57. doi:10.1098/rspb.2004.2933. PMC 1634960. PMID 15695205.
 Emlen, D. J. (2008). "The evolution of animal weapons". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 39: 387–413. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.39.110707.173502.
 Bowyer, R. T. (1986). "Antler characteristics as related to social status of male southern mule deer". The Southwestern Naturalist. 31 (3): 289–98. Bibcode:1986SWNat..31..289B. doi:10.2307/3671833. JSTOR 3671833.
 Ditchkoff, S. S.; Lochmiller, R. L.; Masters, R. E.; Hoofer, S. R.; Den Bussche, R. A. Van (2001). "Major-histocompatibility-complex-associated variation in secondary sexual traits of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) evidence for good-genes advertisement". Evolution. 55 (3): 616–625. doi:10.1111/j.0014-3820.2001.tb00794.x. PMID 11327168. S2CID 10418779.
 Malo, A. F.; Roldan, E. R. S.; Garde, J.; Soler, A. J.; Gomendio, M. (2005). "Antlers honestly advertise sperm production and quality". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 272 (1559): 149–157. doi:10.1098/rspb.2004.2933. PMC 1634960. PMID 15695205.
 Metz, Matthew C.; Emlen, Douglas J.; Stahler, Daniel R.; MacNulty, Daniel R.; Smith, Douglas W. (3 September 2018). "Predation shapes the evolutionary traits of cervid weapons". Nature Ecology & Evolution. 2 (10): 1619–1625. Bibcode:2018NatEE...2.1619M. doi:10.1038/s41559-018-0657-5. PMID 30177803. S2CID 52147419.
 Garrod, A. Notes on the visceral anatomy and osteology of the ruminants, with a suggestion regarding a method of expressing the relations of species by means of formulae. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London, 2–18 (1877).
 Brooke, V. On the classification of the Cervidæ, with a synopsis of the existing Species. Journal of Zoology 46, 883–928 (1878).
 Pocock, R. The Homologies between the Branches of the Antlers of the Cervidae based on the Theory of Dichotomous Growth. Journal of Zoology 103, 377–406 (1933).
 Samejima, Y., Matsuoka, H. A new viewpoint on antlers reveals the evolutionary history of deer (Cervidae, Mammalia). Sci Rep 10, 8910 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-64555-7
 Reid, F. A. (2006). A Field Guide to Mammals of North America, North of Mexico (4th ed.). Boston, US: Houghton Mifflin Co. pp. 153–4. ISBN 978-0-395-93596-5.
 Cockerill, R. (1984). Macdonald, D. (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Mammals. New York, US: Facts on File. pp. 520–9. ISBN 978-0-87196-871-5.
 Uresk, Daniel W., and Donald R. Dietz. "Fecal vs. Rumen Contents to Determine White-tailed Deer Diets." Intermountain Journal of Sciences 24, no. 3-4 (2018): 118–122.
 Case, D.J.; McCullough, D.R. (February 1987). "White-tailed deer forage on alewives". Journal of Mammalogy. 68 (1): 195–198. doi:10.2307/1381075. JSTOR 1381075.
 Ellis-Felege, S. N.; Burnam, J. S.; Palmer, W. E.; Sisson, D. C.; Wellendorf, S. D.; Thornton, R. P.; Stribling, H. L.; Carroll, J. P. (2008). "Cameras identify White-tailed deer depredating Northern bobwhite nests". Southeastern Naturalist. 7 (3): 562–564. doi:10.1656/1528-7092-7.3.562. S2CID 84790827.
 Deer – info and games Sheppard Software.
 Delahay, R. J.; Smith, G. C.; Barlow, A. M.; Walker, N.; Harris, A.; Clifton-Hadley, R. S.; Cheeseman, C. L. (2007). "Bovine tuberculosis infection in wild mammals in the South-West region of England: A survey of prevalence and a semi-quantitative assessment of the relative risks to cattle". The Veterinary Journal. 173 (2): 287–301. doi:10.1016/j.tvjl.2005.11.011. PMID 16434219.
 Ward, A. I.; Smith, G. C.; Etherington, T. R.; Delahay, R. J. (2009). "Estimating the risk of cattle exposure to tuberculosis posed by wild deer relative to badgers in England and Wales". Journal of Wildlife Diseases. 45 (4): 1104–1120. doi:10.7589/0090-3558-45.4.1104. PMID 19901384. S2CID 7102058.
 Anonymous (2008). "Bovine TB: EFRACom calls for a multifaceted approach using all available methods". The Veterinary Record. 162 (9): 258–259. doi:10.1136/vr.162.9.258. PMID 18350673. S2CID 2429198.
 Delahay, R. J.; De Leeuw, A. N. S.; Barlow, A. M.; Clifton-Hadley, R. S.; Cheeseman, C. L. (2002). "The status of Mycobacterium bovis infection in UK wild mammals: A review". The Veterinary Journal. 164 (2): 90–105. doi:10.1053/tvjl.2001.0667. PMID 12359464.
 O'Brien, D. J.; Schmitt, S. M.; Fitzgerald, S. D.; Berry, D. E. (2011). "Management of bovine tuberculosis in Michigan wildlife: Current status and near term prospects". Veterinary Microbiology. 151 (1–2): 179–187. doi:10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.02.042. PMID 21414734.
 Alan Cochrane (January 2019). "Don't fraternize with wild animals: biologist". Moncton Times&Transcript.
 "Wildlife and Heritage Service : Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD)". Maryland Department of Natural Resources. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013.
 Goss, R. J. (1983). Deer Antlers Regeneration, Function and Evolution. Oxford, UK: Elsevier. pp. 43–51. ISBN 9780323140430.
 Janis, C. M.; Effinger, J. A.; Harrison, J. A.; Honey, J. G.; Kron, D. G.; Lander, B.; Manning, E.; Prothero, D.; Stevens, M. S.; Stucky, R. K.; Webb, S. D.; Wright, D. B. (1998). "Artiodactyla". In Janis, C. M.; Scott, K. M.; Jacobs, L. L. (eds.). Evolution of Tertiary Mammals of North America (1st ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 337–74. ISBN 978-0-521-35519-3.
 Heffelfinger, J. (2006). Deer of the Southwest : A Complete Guide to the Natural History, Biology, and Management of Southwestern Mule Deer and White-tailed Deer (1st ed.). Texas, US: Texas A & M University Press. pp. 1–57. ISBN 978-1-58544-515-8.
 Rose, K. D. (1982). "Skeleton of Diacodexis, oldest known artiodactyl". Science. 216 (4546): 621–3. Bibcode:1982Sci...216..621R. doi:10.1126/science.216.4546.621. JSTOR 1687682. PMID 17783306. S2CID 13157519.
 Eldredge, N.; Stanley, S. M., eds. (1984). Living Fossils. New York, US: Springer. ISBN 978-1-4613-8271-3.
 Ludt, C. J.; Schroeder, W.; Rottmann, O.; Kuehn, R. (2004). "Mitochondrial DNA phylogeography of red deer (Cervus elaphus)". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 31 (3): 1064–83. Bibcode:2004MolPE..31.1064L. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2003.10.003. PMID 15120401.
 Vislobokova, I.; Daxner-Höck, G. (2001). "Oligocene–early Miocene ruminants from the Valley of Lakes (central Mongolia)" (PDF). Annalen des Naturhistorischen Museums in Wien. 103: 213–35. JSTOR 41702231. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 April 2016.
 Stirton, R. A. (1944). "Comments on the relationships of the cervoid family Palaeomerycidae". American Journal of Science. 242 (12): 633–55. Bibcode:1944AmJS..242..633S. doi:10.2475/ajs.242.12.633.
 Agate Fossil Beds: Agate Fossil Beds National Monument, Nebraska. Interior Department, National Park Service, Division of Publications. February 1989. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-912627-04-5.
 Gentry, A. W.; Rössner, G. (1994). "The Miocene differentiation of Old World Pecora (Mammalia)". Historical Biology. 7 (2): 115–58. Bibcode:1994HBio....7..115G. doi:10.1080/10292389409380449.
 Azanza, B.; DeMiguel, D.; Andrés, M. (2011). "The antler-like appendages of the primitive deer Dicrocerus elegans: morphology, growth cycle, ontogeny, and sexual dimorphism". Estudios Geológicos. 67 (2): 579–602. doi:10.3989/egeol.40559.207.
 Wang, X.; Xie, G.; Dong, W. (2009). "A new species of crown-antlered deer Stephanocemas (Artiodactyla, Cervidae) from the middle Miocene of Qaidam Basin, northern Tibetan Plateau, China, and a preliminary evaluation of its phylogeny". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society. 156 (3): 680–95. doi:10.1111/j.1096-3642.2008.00491.x.
 Ginsburg, L. (1988). "La faune des mammifères des sables Miocènes du synclinal d'Esvres (Val de Loire)" [The mammalian fauna of the Miocene sands of the syncline Esvres (Loire Valley)]. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences. II (in French): 319–22.
 Walker, D. N. (2000). "Pleistocene and Holocene records of Antilocapra americana: a review of the FAUNMAP data" (PDF). Plains Anthropologist. 45 (174): 13–28. doi:10.1080/2052546.2000.11932020. JSTOR 25669684. S2CID 163903264. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 Dong, W.; Pan, Y.; Liu, J. (September 2004). "The earliest Muntiacus (Artiodactyla, Mammalia) from the Late Miocene of Yuanmou, southwestern China". Comptes Rendus Palevol. 3 (5): 379–86. Bibcode:2004CRPal...3..379D. doi:10.1016/j.crpv.2004.06.002.
 Gilbert, C.; Ropiquet, A.; Hassanin, A. (2006). "Mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenies of Cervidae (Mammalia, Ruminantia): Systematics, morphology, and biogeography". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 40 (1): 101–17. Bibcode:2006MolPE..40..101G. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2006.02.017. PMID 16584894.
 Di Stefano, G.; Petronio, C. (2002). "Systematics and evolution of the Eurasian Plio-Pleistocene tribe Cervini (Artiodactyla, Mammalia)" (PDF). Geologica Romana. 36: 311–34. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 March 2016. Retrieved 11 April 2016.
 Petronio, C.; Krakhmalnaya, T.; Bellucci, L.; Di Stefano, G. (2007). "Remarks on some Eurasian pliocervines: Characteristics, evolution, and relationships with the tribe Cervini". Geobios. 40 (1): 113–30. Bibcode:2007Geobi..40..113P. doi:10.1016/j.geobios.2006.01.002.
 Ghaffar, A.; Akhtar, M.; Nayyer, A. Q. (2011). "Evidences of Early Pliocene fossil remains of tribe Cervini (Mammalia, Artiodactyla, Cervidae) from the Siwaliks of Pakistan" (PDF). Journal of Animal and Plant Sciences. 21 (4): 830–5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 van der Made, J.; Morales, J.; Sen, S.; Aslan, F. (2002). "The first camel from the Upper Miocene of Turkey and the dispersal of the camels into the Old World". Comptes Rendus Palevol. 1 (2): 117–22. Bibcode:2002CRPal...1..117V. doi:10.1016/S1631-0683(02)00012-X.
 Webb, S. D. (2000). "Evolutionary history of New World Cervidae". In Vrba, E. S.; Schaller, G. B. (eds.). Antelopes, Deer, and Relatives: Fossil Record, Behavioral Ecology, Systematics, and Conservation. New Haven, US: Yale University Press. pp. 38–64. ISBN 978-0-300-08142-8.
 De Vos, J.; Mol, D.; Reumer, J. W. F. (1995). "Early Pleistocene Cervidae (Mammalia, Artiodactyla) from the Oosterschelde (the Netherlands), with a revision of the cervid genus Eucladoceros Falconer, 1868" (PDF). Deinsea (2): 95–121. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 Lister, A. M.; Gonzalez, S.; Kitchener, A. C. (2000). "Survival of the Irish elk into the Holocene". Nature. 405 (6788): 753–4. Bibcode:2000Natur.405..753G. doi:10.1038/35015668. PMID 10866185. S2CID 4417046.
 Moen, R. A.; Pastor, J.; Yosef, C. (1999). "Antler growth and extinction of Irish elk" (PDF). Evolutionary Ecology Research (1): 235–49. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 October 2013.
 Lister, Adrian M.; Stuart, Anthony J. (1 January 2019). "The extinction of the giant deer Megaloceros giganteus (Blumenbach): New radiocarbon evidence". Quaternary International. SI: Quaternary International 500. 500: 185–203. Bibcode:2019QuInt.500..185L. doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2019.03.025. ISSN 1040-6182.
 Breda, M.; Marchetti, M. (2005). "Systematical and biochronological review of Plio-Pleistocene Alceini (Cervidae; Mammalia) from Eurasia" (PDF). Quaternary Science Reviews. 24 (5–6): 775–805. Bibcode:2005QSRv...24..775B. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2004.05.005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 Wilson, D. E.; Reeder, D. M., eds. (2005). Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 652–70. ISBN 978-0-8018-8221-0. OCLC 62265494.
 Brooke, V. (1878). "On the classification of the Cervidœ, with a synopsis of the existing species". Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London. 46 (1): 883–928. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.1878.tb08033.x.
 Groves, C.; Grubb, P. (1987). "Relationships of living deer". In Wemmer, C. (ed.). Biology and Management of the Cervidae : A Conference held at the Conservation and Research Center, National Zoological Park, Smithsonian Institution, Front Royal, Virginia, August 1–5, 1982. Washington, US: Smithsonian Institution Press. pp. 21–59. ISBN 978-0-87474-981-6.
 Grubb, P. (2000). "Valid and invalid nomenclature of living and fossil deer, Cervidae" (PDF). Acta Theriologica. 45 (3): 289–307. doi:10.4098/at.arch.00-30. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 Christian Pitra; Joerns Fickel; Eric Meijaard; Colin grooves (2004). "Evolution and phylogeny of old world deer". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 33 (3): 880–895. Bibcode:2004MolPE..33..880P. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2004.07.013. PMID 15522810.
 Gilbert, C.; Ropiquet, A.; Hassanin, A. (2006). "Mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenies of Cervidae (Mammalia, Ruminantia): Systematics, morphology, and biogeography". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 40 (1): 101–117. Bibcode:2006MolPE..40..101G. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2006.02.017. PMID 16584894.
 Hassanin, A., Delsuc, F., Ropiquet, A., Hammer, C., van Vuuren, B. J., Matthee, C., Ruiz-Garcia, M., Catzeflis, F., Areskoug, V., Nguyen, T. T., & Couloux, A. (2012). Pattern and timing of diversification of Cetartiodactyla (Mammalia, Laurasiatheria), as revealed by a comprehensive analysis of mitochondrial genomes. Comptes Rendus Biologies, 335(1), 32–50.
 Heckeberg, N. S., Erpenbeck, D., Wörheide, G., & Rössner, G. E. (2016). Systematic relationships of five newly sequenced cervid species. PeerJ, 4, e2307.
 Heckeberg, N. S. (2020). The systematics of the Cervidae: A total evidence approach. PeerJ, 8, e8114.
 Hassanin, A.; Douzery, E. J. P. (2003). "Molecular and morphological phylogenies of Ruminantia and the alternative position of the Moschidae". Systematic Biology. 52 (2): 206–28. doi:10.1080/10635150390192726. PMID 12746147.
 Feldhamer, G. A.; McShea, W. J. (2011). Deer: The Animal Answer Guide. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 123–32. ISBN 9781421403885.
 Curtis, Gregory (2006). The Cave Painters: Probing the Mysteries of the World's First Artists (1st ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 96–97, 102. ISBN 978-1400043484.
 Lander, Brian; Brunson, Katherine (2018). "Wild Mammals of Ancient North China". The Journal of Chinese History. 2 (2): 291–312. doi:10.1017/jch.2017.45. S2CID 90662935.
 Brunson, Katherine; Lander, Brian (2023). "Deer and Humans in the Early Farming Communities of the Yellow River Valley: A Symbiotic Relationship". Human Ecology. 51 (4): 609–625. Bibcode:2023HumEc..51..609B. doi:10.1007/s10745-023-00432-x. S2CID 261164022.
 Chugg, Andrew (2006). Alexander's Lovers. Raleigh, N.C.: Lulu. pp. 78–79. ISBN 978-1-4116-9960-1.
 Harding, Andrew (23 September 2006). "Beijing's penis emporium". BBC News. Retrieved 23 June 2010.
 Berrin, Katherine & Larco Museum (1997) The Spirit of Ancient Peru:Treasures from the Museo Arqueológico Rafael Larco Herrera. New York: Thames and Hudson, ISBN 0500018022.
 Harvey, G. (2002). Readings in Indigenous Religions. London: Continuum. p. 109. ISBN 978-0826451019.
 Moore, Clement C. (2 December 1823). "An Account of A Visit from St. Nicholas". Troy Sentinel. p. 2. Retrieved 27 March 2015.
 Clement-Davies, D. (2007). Fire Bringer (1st American ed.). New York: Firebird. ISBN 978-0142408735.
 Arthur Fox-Davies, A Complete Guide to Heraldry, T.C. and E.C. Jack, London, 1909, 208–210,
 Courthope, William (1839). Debrett's Complete Peerage of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland: With Additions to the Present Time and a New Set of Coats of Arms from Drawings by Harvey. J. G. & F. Rivington.
 "ГЕРБ ГОРОДА БАЛАХНА". ГЕРБОВНИК.РУ. Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "Символика". АДМИНИСТРАЦИЯ МУНИЦИПАЛЬНОГО ОБРАЗОВАНИЯ "ГУСЕВСКИЙ ГОРОДСКОЙ ОКРУГ". Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "Положение о символах города Нижнего Новгорода". Городская Дума Нижнего Новгорода. 20 December 2006. Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "ГЕРБ ОДИНЦОВСКОГО ГОРОДСКОГО ОКРУГА". ГЕРБОВНИК.РУ. Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "ГЕРБ СЛАВСКОГО МУНИЦИПАЛЬНОГО ОКРУГА". ГЕРБОВНИК.РУ. Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "ГЕРБ ЯМАЛО-НЕНЕЦКОГО АВТОНОМНОГО ОКРУГА". ГЕРБОВНИК.РУ. Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "CoA of Åland". EUROPEANA HERALDICA. National Archives of Finland. Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "Velkommen til Gjemnes kommune". Gjemnes kommune. Retrieved 5 November 2023.
 "Hitra kommune". Hitra kommune. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 "Hjartdal kommune". Hjartdal kommune. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 "Rendalen kommune". Rendalen kommune. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 "Jelenia Gora - Deer Mountain Coat of Arms". Patchion. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 Clara Nevéus och Bror Jacques de Wærn: Ny svensk vapenbok, Streiffert, Stockholm 1992, ISBN 91-7886-092-X, p.150
 "Coat of Arms". Queensland Government. 5 July 2017. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 "Paeria de Cervera". Paeria de Cervera. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 "Andris Teikmanis: jaunizveidotais ģerbonis atveido Sēlijas unikalitāti, identitāti un vēsturi". Latvijas Valsts Prezidents. 31 May 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 "Latviešu vēsturisko zemju ģerboņu likums". Likumi. 18 October 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 "Emblemas nacionales". Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores. Gobierno de Chile. Retrieved 6 November 2023.
 Kralj, Richard Andrew (September 2014). "Venison, Is It For You?". Penn State Extension. Retrieved 20 January 2020.
 Blythman, Joanna; Sykes, Rosie (September 2013). "Why venison is good for you | Joanna Blythman and Rosie Sykes". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 January 2020.
 "U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, and U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Census Bureau. 2006 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 16 November 2012.
 Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920). "Deer" . Encyclopedia Americana.
 Laskow, Sarah (27 August 2014). "Antler Farm". Medium (service). Retrieved 28 August 2014.
 Burden, Dan (June 2012). "Deer Venison Ranching Profile". Agricultural Marketing Resource Center. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 11 April 2016.
 "Worst states for auto-deer crashes". CNN.com. 14 November 2006. Retrieved 5 April 2009.
 "North West Area: Vehicle Activated Deer Warning Signs" (PDF). Transport Scotland. April 2010. 07/NW/0805/046. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2013. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
 "Inuit Bering Sea Eskimo Walrus Ivory and Iron Semi-Lunar Knife 'Ulu' (1800 to 1900 Inuit)". Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 2 October 2018.
 Kawtikwar, Pravin (2010). "Deer antlers- Traditional use and future perspectives". Indian Journal of Traditional Knowledge. 9: 245–251.
 Nugent, G.; Fraser, K. W. (1 October 1993). "Pests or valued resources? Conflicts in management of deer". New Zealand Journal of Zoology. 20 (4): 361–366. doi:10.1080/03014223.1993.10420359. ISSN 0301-4223.
Further reading
Deerland: America's Hunt for Ecological Balance and the Essence of Wildness by Al Cambronne, Lyons Press (2013), ISBN 978-0-7627-8027-3
External links

Look up deer in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Family Cervidae at the Animal Diversity Web
Chronic Wasting Disease Information
Lydekker, Richard (1911). "Deer" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 7 (11th ed.). pp. 922–924.
World of Deer Museum Archived 22 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine
Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture – Deer
"Deer" . The New Student's Reference Work . 1914.
vte
Extant Artiodactyla species
vte
Heraldry
Taxon identifiers
Cervidae	
Wikidata: Q23390Wikispecies: CervidaeADW: CervidaeAFD: CervidaeBOLD: 1473CoL: 7XREoL: 7685EPPO: 1CERVFFauna Europaea: 12647Fauna Europaea (new): 11775a0c-f5d4-4992-ad19-8f6342a3b8caGBIF: 5298iNaturalist: 42158IRMNG: 115925ITIS: 180693MSW: 14200205NBN: NHMSYS0000376180NCBI: 9850NZOR: e453e55e-9524-44ed-8988-416d0ff88311Open Tree of Life: 460505Paleobiology Database: 42652WoRMS: 993628
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicIsrael
Categories: DeerExtant Rupelian first appearancesLivestockMammal common namesMammal familiesTaxa named by Georg August Goldfuss
This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 15:26 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Deer

159 languages
Add topic
